---
title: "History of Research"
---

Although the first ichthyosaur remains to be recognised as belonging to
a separate, extinct group were not found until 1811 by Joseph and Mary
Anning [@Torrens1995], ichthyosaur fossils had been found and published
beforehand. Perhaps the earliest representations were by @Lhwyd1699 [pp
78, 83, pls 17--19 *pars*], which show a proximal scapula and humerus,
identified as *Solearia*, and several vertebrae, identified as
*Ichthyospondyli*. Home's
[-@Home1814; -@Home1816; -@Home1818; -@Home1819a; -@Home1819; -@Home1820]
descriptions of what is now *Temnodontosaurus platyodon* [Conybeare,
-@Conybeare1822] allowed for these isolated and disparate specimens to
be correctly identified, but up to then all British ichthyosaurian
remains had come from the Lower Jurassic Lias Group of Dorset. Materials
from the Middle and Upper Jurassic were noted by @DelaBeche1821
[p. 580], primarily from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation at Kimmeridge,
Dorset, and Shotover, Oxfordshire, but these were too fragmentary to be
described [@Conybeare1822]. @Owen1840 [p. 124] described and named the
first Upper Jurassic specimens, erecting *Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus*
[Owen, -@Owen1840] and *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* [Owen, -@Owen1840] on
the basis of vertebrae from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation (see
[\[Ithyreospondylus,Itrigonus\]](#Ithyreospondylus,Itrigonus){reference-type="ref"
reference="Ithyreospondylus,Itrigonus"}).

@Seeley1869 catalogued specimens in the Woodwardian (now Sedgwick)
Museum, Cambridge, including several specimens from the Middle and Upper
Jurassic. Again, much of this comprised isolated remains, but several
specimens were assigned by Seeley to new taxa: *Ichthyosaurus
chalarodeirus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1869], *Ichthyosaurus hygrodeirus*
[Seeley, -@Seeley1869], and *Ichthyosaurus megalodeirus* [Seeley,
-@Seeley1869] (see
[\[Ichalarodeirus,Ihygrodeirus,Imegalodeirus\]](#Ichalarodeirus,Ihygrodeirus,Imegalodeirus){reference-type="ref"
reference="Ichalarodeirus,Ihygrodeirus,Imegalodeirus"}). Specimens
collected by Mr J. C. Mansel-Pleydell from the Kimmeridge Clay of
Kimmeridge Bay were described by @Hulke1870 [@Hulke1871; @Hulke1872],
and these included the holotype of *Ichthyosaurus enthekiodon* [Hulke,
-@Hulke1871]. Phillips' [-@Phillips1871] account of the geology of
Oxfordshire includes reference to several ichthyosaurian specimens from
the Middle Jurassic Stonesfield Slate (= Stonesfield Member; see
[1.3.1](#StonesfieldMember){reference-type="ref"
reference="StonesfieldMember"}), Middle--Upper Jurassic Oxford Clay
(including those collected by Mr Charles Leeds), and Upper Jurassic
Kimmeridge Clay formations, and he erected several taxa (see
[1.3.1](#StonesfieldMember){reference-type="ref"
reference="StonesfieldMember"}). @Lydekker1888 reviewed many of these
taxa, and found most to be uncertain and based upon incomplete remains.
Despite completing several monographs of Mesozoic reptiles [e.g.
@Owen1869; @Owen1881], Owen did not cover the ichthyosaurs of the Middle
and Upper Jurassic, aside from a brief mention of Middle Jurassic
remains of *Ichthyosaurus brachyspondylus* [Owen, -@Owen1881] from
Russia [@Owen1881 127], and figuring vertebrae from the Kimmeridge Clay
Formation ( NHMUK 46473e, see
[\[NenthekiodonMaterial\]](#NenthekiodonMaterial){reference-type="ref"
reference="NenthekiodonMaterial"}; [@Owen1881 pl. 22; *fide*
@Lydekker1889 pp. 33--34]). @Lydekker1889 catalogued specimens in the
then British Museum (Natural History), including several he referred to
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and *Ichthyosaurus enthekiodon*. He later
added to this, and further named *Ophthalmosaurus pleydelli* [Lydekker,
-@Lydekker1890] from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation of Dorset (see
[\[Opleydelli\]](#Opleydelli){reference-type="ref"
reference="Opleydelli"}); @Mansel-Pleydell1890 described this specimen
more fully.

From 1867, Mr Charles E. Leeds, later joined, and then succeeded, by his
brother, Mr Alfred N. Leeds, began collecting from the brick pits in the
Oxford Clay Formation around Peterborough. These proved to be prolific
in vertebrate remains, ichthyosaurs being particularly common.
Examination of the collection by @Seeley1874 led to the identification
of a new genus and species of ichthyosaur, *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*,
distinguished on the form of its pectoral girdle and forelimb. The
efforts of the Leeds brothers in collecting material led @Woodward1890
[p. xv] to call the collection "unrivalled". Acquaintance with Dr Henry
Woodward, then Keeper of Geology at the then British Museum (Natural
History), led to the sale of the 'first' Leeds Collection to the museum
between 1890 and 1893 [@Leeds1956]; several subsequent purchases were
made up to 1920. Other parts of the collection have been distributed to
GLAHM, GPIT, LEICT and PETMG, among others. The collection includes
around 50 species of vertebrates, as well as arthropods, molluscs, and
brachiopods. @Andrews1910 [@Andrews1913] completed an extended
description of the marine reptiles from this collection
(ichthyosaurians, crocodilians, and plesiosaurians), identifying one
ichthyosaur taxon: *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. This species later became
one of the prize display specimens in the NHMUK [@Andrews1915], and is
still found in the main entrance foyer
([1.1](#fig:NHM-Oicenicus-mount){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:NHM-Oicenicus-mount"}). The Leeds Collection was an
important resource in the revision of the stratigraphy of the Oxford
Clay Formation [@Cox1992]. This, along with further excavations, formed
the basis of Martill's [-@Martill1985; -@Martill1986; -@Martill1987]
stratigraphic and taphonomic study of vertebrates from the Peterborough
Member. He identified a particular concentration of vertebrate material
in this member, relative to the two above, and that more articulated
remains are largely found in two specific beds (see
[1.3.3](#OxfordClay){reference-type="ref" reference="OxfordClay"}).

Following the description of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, and the
discovery of *Baptanodon* [Marsh, -@Marsh1880b] (= *Sauranodon* [Marsh,
-@Marsh1879]) in the Upper Jurassic of the USA
[@Marsh1880a; @Marsh1880b], debate over the taxonomic status of these
two genera has continued (see
[\[synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon\]](#synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon){reference-type="ref"
reference="synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon"}). @Bauer1898 completed a
study of ichthyosaurs in the upper Weißer Jura (approximately Upper
Jurassic) and equivalent beds of Europe. Here he provided extensive
descriptions of remains referred to *Ichthyosaurus posthumus* [Wagner,
-@Wagner1852], but, in taxonomic review, considered most Upper Jurassic
ichthyosaur taxa (including *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, but excluding
*Ichthyosaurus enthekiodon*) to be junior synonyms of *Ichthyosaurus
trigonus*
([\[Ithyreospondylus,Itrigonus\]](#Ithyreospondylus,Itrigonus){reference-type="ref"
reference="Ithyreospondylus,Itrigonus"}). A new specimen, later decided
to be from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation, allowed @Boulenger1904 to
erect the new species *Ichthyosaurus extremus* [Boulenger,
-@Boulenger1904], which, like *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, and various
species of *Ichthyosaurus* [König, -@Konig1818], was based upon the
structure of the forelimb.

For much of the first half of the Twentieth Century, British ichthyosaur
palaeontology was somewhat in the doldrums, particularly as regards work
on materials from the Middle and Upper Jurassic. Important contributions
were made by @Huene1916 [@Huene1922b; @Huene1931b], mostly on the
taxonomy and relations of Liassic ichthyosaurs, although he did complete
a generic revision of *Ichthyosaurus enthekiodon* and *Ichthyosaurus
extremus* to *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* and *Brachypterygius extremus*
respectively [@Huene1922b pp 97--98]. *Ophthalmosaurus* [Seeley,
-@Seeley1874] was revisited by @Appleby1956 [@Appleby1958], who
re-described portions of the material and catalogued collections derived
from the Leeds' Oxford Clay collection. In particular, @Appleby1956
discussed the variation found in specimens referred to
*Ophthalmosaurus*, finding, like @Andrews1910, that there was a
continuous range. Appleby did, however, consider the notches on the
coracoid to be taxonomically important, and divided *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* into two species: *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and
*Ophthalmosaurus monocharactus* [Appleby, -@Appleby1956] (see
[\[OicenicusDiscussion,Omonocharactus\]](#OicenicusDiscussion,Omonocharactus){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusDiscussion,Omonocharactus"}). @Delair1959 reviewed
the ichthyosaurian remains found in Dorset, including the material
evidence for each taxon; like those before, he found many taxa were
based on insubstantial vertebral remains.

Towards the end of the Twentieth Century, the pace of ichthyosaur
research increased. This included the use of new quantitative and
phenetic techniques used in both taxonomy and systematics
[@McGowan1974; @McGowan1974a; @McGowan1976; @Johnson1977; @Johnson1979].
@McGowan1976 again reprised the taxonomy of Middle and Upper Jurassic
ichthyosaurs, finding many to be *nomina dubia* or *nomina nuda*.
@Kirton1983 completed a thorough redescription of Oxford Clay and
Kimmeridge Clay ichthyosaurs, which has served for many years as the
master description, despite remaining unpublished, and she recognised
four valid taxa: *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, *Nannopterygius
enthekiodon*, *Brachypterygius extremus*, and *Grendelius mordax*
[McGowan, -@McGowan1976]. @Delair1985 figured poorly known specimens,
including a possible counterpart to the holotype of *Brachypterygius
extremus* (WESTM 1978.219), and CRYNH 209, an ophthalmosaurid from the
Middle Jurassic Cornbrash Formation.

The most recent work to include Middle and Upper Jurassic ichthyosaurs
has focussed on placing them in a phylogenetic context. Three
whole-group generic-level phylogenies
[@Motani1999c; @Maisch2000c; @Sander2000], following from previous
smaller analyses [@Mazin1982; @Caldwell1996], found a monophyletic
Ophthalmosauridae within the Parvipelvia that includes all post-Early
Jurassic ichthyosaur taxa. As new discoveries have been made, these
phylogenies have been extended and re-run, with a special focus on these
two clades [e.g. @Fernandez2007; @Fischer2014; @Fischer2014b].

Worldwide, ichthyosaur remains from this time are most common from the
Upper Jurassic, although diagnostic specimens are known from the Middle
Jurassic also. In the Aalenian, this is limited to *Stenopterygius
aaleniensis* [Maxwell *et al.*, -@Maxwell2012b] from south-western
Germany. @Valenciennes1861 [@Valenciennes1861a] presented two specimens,
possibly pertaining to the same individual, from the Kimmeridge Clay
Formation of northern France, naming these *Ichthyosaurus cuvieri*
[Valenciennes, -@Valenciennes1861] and *Ichthyosaurus normanniae*
[Valenciennes, -@Valenciennes1861a] respectively. Further remains from
the Tithonian of northern France were described by @Sauvage1888
[@Sauvage1902; @Sauvage1902b; @Sauvage1902c; @Sauvage1902a]. He
recognised five species of ichthyosaur [@Sauvage1902c]: *Ichthyosaurus
thyreospondylus, Ichthyosaurus trigonus, Nannopterygius enthekiodon,*
and *Ophthalmosaurus cuvieri* [Valenciennes, @Valenciennes1861] based
mostly on vertebral and limb material, although he also described skull
material [@Sauvage1902a]. @Sauvage1911 described further material
referred to *Nannopterygius enthekiodon, Ophthalmosaurus cuvieri,* and
*Ichthyosaurus trigonus,* including limb material that @Huene1922b later
used to erect the genus *Macropterygius*. This latter material is
similar to that from the Kimmeridge Clay of the UK described below (see
[1.5.1.6](#Macropterygiusspindet){reference-type="ref"
reference="Macropterygiusspindet"}). More recently, disarticulated
remains from the Tithonian of Boulogne, France, were described and
referred to *Ophthalmosaurus* sp. [@Bardet1997]. While referral to
species level is not possible based on the material available, this
material provides evidence for the presence of *Ophthalmosaurus* in the
Tithonian of northern France (see also
[\[OicenicusKimmClay\]](#OicenicusKimmClay){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusKimmClay"}).

@Wagner1852 [@Wagner1853; @Jager1856; @Meyer1864] described remains,
including the ichthyosaurian *Ichthyosaurus leptospondylus* [Wagner,
-@Wagner1853], from the lithographic limestones (Solnhofen Formation,
Kimmeridgian--Tithonian) of Bavaria, southern Germany. @Bardet2000
revisited these, re-assigning them to *Aegirosaurus leptospondylus*
[Wagner, -@Wagner1853]. Fragmentary ichthyosaur remains were reported
from the Upper Jurassic--Lower Cretaceous sequence of west coast USA by
@Camp1942 [@Camp1966]. @Rusconi1938
[@Rusconi1940; @Rusconi1942; @Rusconi1948] described Middle and Upper
Jurassic ichthyosaur remains from Mendoza, Argentina, that are
strikingly similar to those from both the UK and the USA. The Neuquén
Basin has proven productive for ichthyosaur fossils. Five ichthyosaur
taxa are known from this locality: *Chacaicosaurus cayi* [Fernández,
-@Fernandez1994], *Caypullisaurus bonapartei* [Fernández,
-@Fernandez1997a], *Mollesaurus periallus* [Fernández, -@Fernandez1999],
*'Ophthalmosaurus monocharactus'*, and *Arthropterygius* sp.
[@Gasparini1988; @Gasparini2007; @Fernandez2012]. *Arthropterygius*
[Maxwell, -@Maxwell2010] has also been found in the Late Jurassic of
northern Canada [@Russell1993; @Maxwell2010]. Ophthalmosaurids have been
found in the Oxfordian of Mexico and Cuba also
[@Fernandez2000; @Buchy2009; @Buchy2010]. @Fernandez1997 referred a
basioccipital from the Portlandian of Madagascar to *Brachypterygius*
sp., which was later assigned to *Brachypterygius extremus* by
@McGowan2003 (see
[\[BextremusMaterial\]](#BextremusMaterial){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusMaterial"}), and a partial distal limb to
Ichthyosauria *incertae sedis*. The similarity between the above
mentioned taxa and worldwide specimens suggest that the connected
proto-Atlantic and peri-Tethyan regions experienced strong interchange
of ichthyosaur taxa throughout the Middle to Late Jurassic.

Further Upper Jurassic--Lower Cretaceous (Volgian = upper
Kimmeridgian--lower Berriasian) ichthyosaurs have been described from
Saratov and Volga Oblasts, Russia. Plesiosaur and ichthyosaur remains
were mentioned by @Zhuravlev1941 [@Zhuravlev1943]. More complete
specimens have since been described briefly, and several taxa erected
[@Storrs2000], for example, *'Ophthalmosaurus undorensis'* [Efimov,
-@Efimov1991], *'Brachypterygius zhuravlevi'* [Arkhangelsky,
-@Arkhangelsky1998], and *Undorosaurus gorodischensis* [Efimov,
-@Efimov1999a]. The similarity between the above mentioned taxa and
worldwide specimens suggest that the connected proto-Atlantic and
peri-Tethyan regions experienced strong interchange of ichthyosaur taxa
throughout the Middle to Late Jurassic. Recent excavations in the Upper
Jurassic--Lower Cretaceous of Spitsbergen, Norway, have uncovered
several new marine reptile taxa, with ichthyosaurs being the most common
representatives [@Angst2010; @Druckenmiller2012a]. While these are all
Ophthalmosauridae, there is little taxonomic overlap with those from the
UK or worldwide. Although a seaway seems to have been present between
the Tethys/proto-Atlantic and Boreal oceans at this time, as evidenced
by the influx of Boreal ammonite faunas [@Hudson1994], there is little
evidence for interchange between these two ichthyosaur faunas.

