---
title: "Stratigraphy"
---

The Jurassic System in the British Isles is complex and variable,
reflecting diverse and rapidly changing palaeoenvironments. A full
account is beyond the scope of this monograph, so only those horizons
that have produced notable ichthyosaur remains are discussed below
([\[fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities,fig:MUJ-stratigraphy\]](#fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities,fig:MUJ-stratigraphy){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities,fig:MUJ-stratigraphy"}).

![Map of major Middle and Upper Jurassic rock outcrop in the UK, with
important ichthyosaur-producing localities indicated. Scale bar
represents 100 km.
[\[fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities\]]{#fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities
label="fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities"}](./img/fig-MUJ-outcrop-localities.pdf){#fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities
width="60%"}

Much of the Middle Jurassic (i.e. Aalenian--Bathonian) has produced few
ichthyosaur remains, or marine reptiles more generally. Indeed,
worldwide diagnostic ichthyosaur finds from this time are limited to
only four taxa: *Mollesaurus periallus, Stenopterygius aaleniensis,
Chacaicosaurus cayi,* and *'Stenopterygius grandis'* [Cabrera,
-@Cabrera1939]. Diagnostic specimens are rare; these taxa are
represented by few complete fossils [@Maxwell2012b; @Fernandez2014].
British ichthyosaur remains from the Aalenian--Bathonian are poorly
known. Fragmentary remains referred to *Ichthyosaurus* have been
reported from the Inferior Oolite (Aalenian--Bajocian) of Dorset and
Gloucestershire, with possible further material from North Yorkshire
[@Benton1995]. Isolated vertebrae have been described from the
Stonesfield Member of the Taynton Limestone Formation (= Stonesfield
Slate, middle Bathonian: [@Phillips1871; @Boneham1993; @Benton1995]). A
partial forelimb (humerus, radius, and ulna: CRYNH 209) of an
ophthalmosaurid ichthyosaur has been found in the Cornbrash Formation
(Bathonian) of Yetminster, Dorset [@Delair1985]. It is not until the
Callovian, with the exceptional abundance of fossils from the Oxford
Clay Formation, that ichthyosaur remains become more abundant and
complete.

![image](./img/fig-MUJ-Stratigraphy.pdf){width="19cm"}

## Stonesfield Member {#StonesfieldMember}

The Stonesfield Member (Taynton Limestone Formation, Bathonian, Middle
Jurassic: [@Boneham1993]) of Oxfordshire is one of the few Middle
Jurassic horizons that have produced ichthyosaurian remains, but these
are limited to a few non-diagnostic vertebral remains. @Phillips1871
mentioned a vertebral centrum (OUMNH J12001) from the Stonesfield Slate
and erected *Ichthyosaurus advena* [Phillips, -@Phillips1871] for this
(see [\[Iadvena\]](#Iadvena){reference-type="ref" reference="Iadvena"}).
This horizon is a sand-enveloped laminated calcareous grit with oolites
and shells [@Boneham1993] interpreted as a result of clastic deposition
during a transgressive event. The palaeoenvironment was offshore shallow
marine, but with a large terrestrial input, and possible influx and
rapid deposition during storm events [@Benton1995].

## Cornbrash Formation {#Cornbrash}

The Cornbrash Formation straddles the boundary between the Bathonian and
Callovian. It is bounded by the Forest Marble, Blisworth Clay or Scalby
formations below, and the Kellaways Formation above, extending for up to
10.5 m thick [@Cope1980; @Page1989]. The limestones of the Cornbrash
Formation mark a staged marine transgression, transitioning from
nearshore to offshore deposits [@Arkell1933; @Bradshaw1992]. Vertebrate
remains have been recorded, such as dinosaurs and marine crocodilians,
but most of these are poorly preserved [@Weishampel2005]. One
ichthyosaur specimen: CRYNH 209, from the Cornbrash of Yetminster is
known, representing one of the earliest ophthalmosaurid remains in
Europe.

## Oxford Clay Formation {#OxfordClay}

The Oxford Clay Formation spans much of the Callovian (Peterborough and
Stewartby members) and the lower part of the Oxfordian (Weymouth
Member). It was originally named by Buckland [in @Phillips1818] and
redefined as the Oxford Clay Formation by @Cox1992. The Oxford Clay
Formation outcrops in a north-easterly to south-westerly directed arc
across southern and north-eastern England, with well-known localities at
Weymouth, Dorset; Oxford, Oxfordshire; and Peterborough, Cambridgeshire,
but outcrops extend between Dorset and Yorkshire
([1.2](#fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities"}; [@Wright2001; @Cox2002]).
Further outcrop is found in the Inner Hebridean islands of Skye, Eigg,
and Scalpay [@Turner1966]. It is divided into the Peterborough (= Lower
Oxford Clay), Stewartby (= Middle Oxford Clay), and Weymouth (= Upper
Oxford Clay) members, with a total thickness of up to 185 m [@Cox1992].

### Peterborough Member {#PeterboroughMember}

The Peterborough Member is 16.8 m thick at its type section, King's
Dyke, near Whittlesey, Cambridgeshire [ TL 248967: @Hudson1994], but may
be up to 65 m thick [@Cox1992]. It is bounded by the sandy Kellaways
Formation below, with which it interbeds, also the base of the Oxford
Clay Formation, and the Stewartby Member above. The lithology is largely
organic-rich (bituminous), fissile shales, interspersed with laterally
discontinuous bivalve-dominated shell beds (e.g. *Gryphaea* [Lamarck,
-@Lamarck1801], *Grammatodon* [Meek & Hayden, -@Meek1860], and
*Meleagrinella* [Whitfield, -@Whitfield1885]) and sands; @Hudson1994,
after @Calloman1968, separated 55 numbered beds. Its high organic
content [over 9%: @MacQuaker1994] allowed more efficient 'self-firing'
bricks to be made [Fletton process:
@MonopoliesandMergersCommission1976], and led to extensive workings by
the London Brick Company in the area around Peterborough,
Cambridgeshire. The Peterborough Member spans four ammonite biozones
that extend from the uppermost Lower Callovian to the lowermost Upper
Callovian
([\[fig:MUJ-stratigraphy\]](#fig:MUJ-stratigraphy){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MUJ-stratigraphy"}; [@Martill1991]).

### Stewartby and Weymouth members {#StewarbyWeymouthmembers}

The Stewartby and Weymouth members are lithologically similar and
largely distinguished by their faunal compositions [@Martill1986]. The
base of the Stewartby Member is the top of the highest organic-rich
mudstone of the Peterborough Member, and it extends up to 50 m to its
upper boundary with the Weymouth Member at the top of the Lamberti
Limestone [@Cox1992]. The type section is located at the London Brick
Company's Rookery Pit, Stewartby, Bedfordshire ( TL 015409;
[@Cox1992; @Berridge1998]). This member spans much of the Upper
Callovian [@Martill1991].

The Weymouth Member is the uppermost member of the Oxford Clay
Formation. It is bounded by the top of the Stewartby Member below and it
coarsens up into the silty mudstones or siltstones of the West Walton
Formation above [@Cox1992]. This member can be up to 70 m thick. The
type sections are located at Ham and Furzy or Jordan cliffs, Weymouth,
Dorset (SY 697816). The Weymouth Member spans the Lower Oxfordian
[@Martill1991].

Both the Stewartby and Weymouth members are more calcareous than the
underlying Peterborough Member, comprising blocky and poorly
fossiliferous mudstones with a lower organic content and thin calcareous
siltstones. The Stewartby Member is more variably silty than the
Weymouth Member [@Cox1992].

### Vertebrate fossils {#OxfordClayVertebrates}

Vertebrate fossils are most common in the Peterborough Member and are
particularly associated with the '*Gryphaea* and Reptile beds' (beds
1--13, 1.2 m), which comprise the lowest part of the Oxford Clay
Formation [@Martill1986; @Hudson1994]. This horizon was well exposed by
the clay mining in the Peterborough area, and is the source of much of
the material in the Leeds Collection [@Andrews1910; @Leeds1956]. The
nature of the lithology allows the material to be completely removed
from the matrix so that specimens can be viewed completely exposed and
in three dimensions [@Martill1986]. Shallow burial also means that many
of the remains have suffered little or no crushing, and so many
specimens retain their original, three-dimensional forms [@Hudson1978].
Beds 8 and 10 are notable for producing articulated ichthyosaur remains
[@Martill1986; @Hudson1994]. More generally, marine reptile remains
include the plesiosaurians: *Cryptoclidus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1892],
*Liopleurodon* [Sauvage, -@Sauvage1873], *Marmornectes* [Ketchum &
Benson, -@Ketchum2011], *Muraenosaurus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874a]; the
thalattosuchians: *Metriorhynchus* [Meyer, -@Meyer1830], *Steneosaurus*
[Geoffrey, -@Geoffrey1825], and *Tyrannoneustes* [-@Young2013 Young et
al.,]; and the ichthyosaurian *Ophthalmosaurus*, among others
[@Leeds1956; @Martill1986; @Martill1991]. Dinosaurs including the
theropod *Eustreptospondylus* [Walker, -@Walker1964] are also known
[@Weishampel2005; @Sadleir2008]. Partially and fully disarticulated
ichthyosaur specimens can be found higher in the Peterborough Member
(e.g.  BUCCM 1983/1008: [@Martill1986; @Martill1987]).

### Interpretation {#OxfordClayInterpretation}

The Oxford Clay Formation is interpreted as the result of a
transgressive sequence, continuing from the uppermost Bathonian through
the Callovian, and forming a shallow epeiric sea in which deep water
dysoxic mudstones were deposited across much of Central and East England
[@Hudson1991; @Bradshaw1992]. Below, the Kellaways Sand Formation
interfingers with the Peterborough Member in its lower parts. As the
Peterborough Member is comparatively organic-rich, and there is
relatively little disturbance of the sediment by benthic organisms, it
is likely to have been low in oxygen and with a substrate that was
unstable or had a high water content [@Hudson1991]. This 'soupy
substrate' may have allowed for the prolific and complete preservation
seen in this horizon [@Martill1987; @Martill1993]. The environment was
probably nearshore, based on an apparent influx of terrestrial organic
matter and the relative frequency of terrestrial dinosaur remains.
Further deepening through the Callovian and into the Oxfordian placed
the Stewartby and Weymouth members farther offshore, so reducing the
supply of organic material.

## Corallian Group {#Corallian}

The Corallian Group is a complex and highly variable sequence of
limestones and sandstones that represent a series of repeated
regressions from offshore or nearshore to shore deposits. It is bounded
by the Oxford Clay Formation below and the Kimmeridge Clay Formation
above, is about 100 m thick, and spans much of the Oxfordian
[@Cope1980]. Important outcrops are in South Dorset, Oxfordshire, and
North Yorkshire [@Bradshaw1992]. Vertebrate remains from the Corallian
Group are rare [@Benton1995]. However, seven specimens have been
assigned to ichthyosaurs: OUMNH J50342, J52433--J52435, CAMSM J58841,
J10509, and J12051. Most of these isolated or short runs of vertebrae;
OUMNH J50342 is a coracoid referred to *Ophthalmosaurus*, but this is
not diagnostic. While ichthyosaur remains are certainly present in the
Corallian Group, they appear to only have been transient visitors.

## Kimmeridge Clay Formation {#KimmeridgeClay}

As one of the major source rocks for the North Sea oil industry, the
stratigraphy of the Kimmeridge Clay Formation has been intensely studied
offshore. Onshore deposits, by virtue of their ease of access and more
continuous exposure, have also received a great deal of attention,
although with less focus on the vertebrate palaeontology than the Oxford
Clay Formation. The Kimmeridge Clay Formation is closely associated with
the Oxford Clay Formation (together they form the major part of the
Ancholme Group), and so has a broadly similar outcrop across England,
from Dorset to Yorkshire
([1.2](#fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities"}). Further important outcrops
that have produced vertebrate remains are found on the Isle of Skye
[@Arkell1933]. The Kimmeridge Clay Formation is dominated by calcareous
and organic-rich mudstones, with frequent oil shales, stone bands, and
concretion beds [@Cope1967; @Cox1981]. Its total thickness is over 500 m
in parts of South Dorset, the type area (\>541 m at Encombe Borehole, SZ
97127831; [@Barton2011]), spanning much of the uppermost Jurassic (see
below and
[\[fig:MUJ-stratigraphy\]](#fig:MUJ-stratigraphy){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MUJ-stratigraphy"}). It is traditionally divided into two
parts after the historic British Lower and Upper Kimmeridgian age
[@Cope1967; @Cox1981].

The Lower Kimmeridge Clay is bounded by the base of the *Torquirhynchia
inconstans* Bed (bed KC1) below and the base of bed KC36 above [bed
numbers after @Gallois2000], spanning the *Pictonia baylei* to
*Aulacostephanus autissiodorensis* ammonite biozones. The best exposures
of this unit are at Black Head (SY 729818), Kimmeridge Bay (SY 905792),
and Ringstead Bay (SY 761814), Dorset. Towards the bottom are several
siltstone beds (e.g. Wyke Siltstone, KC5, and Black Head Siltstone,
KC8), but the upper portion is mudstone- and oil shale-dominated. The
Upper Kimmeridge Clay spans the *Pectinatites elegans* to
*Virgatopavlovia fittoni* ammonite biozones, bounded by bed KC35 below
and the base of the Massive Bed in the Portland Group above. This
portion is completely exposed between Kimmeridge Bay and Chapman's Pool,
Dorset [@Gallois2000; @Barton2011]. The Upper Kimmeridge Clay is
generally more calcareous than the Lower Kimmeridge Clay, forming the
distinctive 'dolomitic ledges' of Kimmeridge Bay; organic-rich 'oil
shales' are more common in the middle of the formation (e.g. the
'Blackstone', bed KC42).

It is important to note that the International Stage boundary between
the Kimmeridgian and Tithonian is near the base of the *Hybonoticeras
hybonotum* Ammonite Biozone in the Tethyan domain [@Ogg2012]. This is
midway through the *Aulacostephanus autissiodorensis* Ammonite Biozone
in Britain. Therefore, the uppermost part of the Lower Kimmeridge Clay
and the Upper Kimmeridge Clay and Portland Group are Tithonian
([\[fig:MUJ-stratigraphy\]](#fig:MUJ-stratigraphy){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MUJ-stratigraphy"}).

### Vertebrate fossils {#KimmeridgeClayVertebrates}

Vertebrate fossils are found more consistently throughout the Kimmeridge
Clay Formation than in the Oxford Clay Formation, but only certain
sections have produced abundant remains. The Wyke Siltstone (KC5) has
produced some recent striking remains of marine crocodilians and
pliosaurs [e.g. @Wilkinson2008; @Benson2013]. Marine reptile finds are
also common towards the top of the formation [@Taylor1986]. Notable
ichthyosaurian remains include *Nannopterygius enthekiodon*, possibly
from one of the *Aulacostephanus* sp. biozones [Lower Kimmeridge Clay;
@Arkell1933 p. 451], and *Brachypterygius extremus* from the
*Pectinatites wheatleyensis* Ammonite Biozone [Upper Kimmeridge Clay;
@McGowan1976]. Further remains of terrestrial dinosaurs are not uncommon
in the Kimmeridge Clay Formation. The exposures at Westbury, Wiltshire;
Ely, Cambridgeshire, and Cumnor, Oxfordshire, are also noted for their
vertebrate remains [@Arkell1933; @Benton1995; @Grange1996].

### Interpretation {#KimmeridgeClayInterpretation}

The Kimmeridge Clay Formation is interpreted as a transgressive
sequence, overlying the shallower water Corallian Group. The Kimmeridge
Clay was deposited in a shallow epeiric sea that covered much of
England, Wales, and western Scotland [@Bradshaw1992]. This sea probably
did not exceed 50 m depth, as suggested by winnowing and storm beds
[@Wignall1994]. Dysoxia led to the preservation of organic matter, with
palaeoecological studies indicating occasional anoxic conditions
[@Wignall1990; @Wignall1991]; these alternations may indicate climatic
control and Milankovitch cyclicity [@Barton2011]. Higher proportions of
epifauna in the top part of the Upper Kimmeridge Clay (*Pectinatites
pectinatus* Ammonite Biozone and up) than below suggest a reduction in
sedimentation rates and firming of the substrate; below this, the
Kimmeridge Clay is more consistently infauna-dominated [@Wignall1990].

## Portland and Purbeck groups {#PortlandPurbeck}

Few ichthyosaurian remains have been found in the Portlandian (≈ upper
Tithonian) Portland and Purbeck groups [@Delair1968]. Two vertebrae (
NHMUK PV R1683 and R1684) from the Portland Oolite and Portlandian of
the Isle of Portland, Dorset, and three humeri ( OUMNH J1585, J1586, and
J1608) from the 'Portland Rock' (= Portland Stone Formation) of Swindon,
Wiltshire, are known. A partial ichthyosaur skeleton ( OUMNH J13795) has
been found in the Purbeck Limestone of Swanage, Dorset, but this has
since been identified as deriving from the Lower Cretaceous
[@Delair1968; @Ensom2009]. The Portland Group overlies the Kimmeridge
Clay Formation on the Isle of Portland, and is itself overlain by the
Purbeck Group. Outcrops are extensive in South Dorset (Isle of Portland
to Isle of Purbeck) but extend to Wiltshire, Oxfordshire,
Buckinghamshire, and The Weald [@Cope1980]. The sequence represents a
progressive shallowing and exposure through the Tithonian into the Early
Cretaceous. This is shown by the succession of sands and limestones with
cherts and oolites that comprise the Portland Sand and Portland Stone
formations respectively [@Arkell1933; @Barton2011]. The lowermost
(Jurassic) part of the Purbeck Group (lower Mupe Member) is marginal to
emergent, with occasional marine incursions [@Barton2011].
