---
title: "Material & Methods"
---

A large number of specimens from several collections were examined in
the process of completing the systematic descriptions below. These are
listed under the relevant headings, and in the Appendix
([4](#appendix:Ichthyosaurindet){reference-type="ref"
reference="appendix:Ichthyosaurindet"}). Much of this was derived from
the Leeds' Collection and other historical collections (see
[1.2](#history){reference-type="ref" reference="history"}); more
recently available specimens were also included. Dimensions, where
given, were taken using plastic callipers to the nearest 0.05 mm (0--140
mm), or tape measure to the nearest millimetre (\>140 mm). For each
taxa, the material is described; *Brachypterygius extremus* and
*Nannopterygius enthekiodon* are compared directly to *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, and comparisons of all three taxa to other ichthyosaurs are
made separately (see
[1.6](#OsteologicalComparisons){reference-type="ref"
reference="OsteologicalComparisons"}). Minor preparatory work was
carried out on specimen BRSMG Ce 16696
([1.32](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body"}) to expose the left forelimb. This
used air pens (sizes 2, 3, and chisel tip) to remove the overburden, and
air abrasive (AlO, 45 µm diameter). The preparation exposed the distal
portion of the left forelimb in ventral view as well as evidence of
remineralised soft tissue preservation. Ichthyosaur occurrence data in
the palaeogeographical map
([1.37](#fig:MLJichthyosaur-pbgeog){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MLJichthyosaur-pbgeog"}) was derived from Fossilworks
(<http://fossilworks.org>) and the Palaeobiology Database
(<http://paleobiodb.org/>) in January 2014 [@Alroy2013; @Alroy2013a]
with additional subsequent data taken directly from the literature. The
palaeogeographical maps
([1.37](#fig:MLJichthyosaur-pbgeog){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MLJichthyosaur-pbgeog"}) have been simplified from
@Blakey2008.

## Taxonomic philosophy {#TaxonomicPhilosophy}

The taxonomic philosophy applied here -- and throughout this thesis --
is that of phylogenetic taxonomy: the definition of taxa based upon
phylogeny as propounded by @Queiroz1992 [@Queiroz1992a] and in the
International Code of Phylogenetic Nomenclature (Phylocode;
<https://www.ohio.edu/phylocode/index.html>). This system provides a
useful taxonomic framework that, unlike Linnaean taxonomy, incorporates
evolution, but also allows variation as a result of new understanding
and testing of hypotheses (through new material and revised
phylogenies). When used correctly, the consistency of defined
taxa-clades provides nomenclatural stability, even though the topology
may change; I find this attractive. Concerns about phylogenetic taxonomy
have included its application and linkage between nomenclature and
taxonomy -- the *definitions* of taxa
[@Stuessy2000; @Queiroz2000; @Stuessy2001; @Queiroz2001] -- and its
utility as a classification tool [e.g. @Benton2000]; some of these
issues are semantic. Instability in both a Linnaean and phylogenetic
system are created *in partim* by incompatible concepts of what each
taxon refers to (its taxonomic component): either by disagreement on
taxonomically important characters, or the lack of such useful
characters being present.

More fundamentally, the use of genus as the basic unit of taxonomy
within (vertebrate )palaeontology -- as opposed to species more
generally in biology -- makes sense to me given the poorer set of
comparative data available (i.e. fewer individuals present across
greater time scales). Applied to ichthyosaurs, and other taxa from
lagerstätten, the increased number of specimens available within a
constrained time period and geographical location makes resolution to
the species level more certain by comparison. This may be one reason why
multi-species ichthyosaur genera have been preserved from deposits such
as the Lias of the UK, and the Posidonia Shale of south-western Germany.
