---
title: "Systematic Palaeontology"
---

## Taxa valida {#tax:taxavalida}

### Neoichthyosauria

Neoichthyosauria was defined by @Sander2000 [22] as the last common
ancestor of *Temnodontosaurus platyodon* and *Ichthyosaurus,* and all
its descendants, and intended to incorporate all post-Triassic
ichthyosaurs. *Dearcmhara shawcrossi* [Brusatte *et al.*,
-@Brusatte2015] was recently described from the Bearreraig Sandstone
Formation (Toarcian--Bajocian) of the Isle of Skye, Scotland, United
Kingdom, as a Neoichthyosaurian. Because of its recent description and
uncertain occurrence, it is not included in this systematic
palaeontology section, however, comparisons are drawn below (see
[\[tax:comp:Dshawcrossi\]](#tax:comp:Dshawcrossi){reference-type="ref"
reference="tax:comp:Dshawcrossi"}).

### Ophthalmosauridae

The clade Ophthalmosauridae (last common ancestor of *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* and *Arthropterygius chrisorum* [Russell, -@Russell1993], and
all its descendants, *sensu* @Fischer2011c) originated in the Middle
Jurassic [@Fischer2013a]. The name was originally used by @Baur1887, but
translated as Baptanodontidae in the English version [@Baur1887a].
@Motani1999c [p. 484] mistakenly attributed this taxon to @Appleby1956,
but renamed it Ophthalmosauria. *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and
*Brachypterygius extremus* are certainly present within this clade: the
definition of @Fischer2011c [p. 1020] is modified from Motani's
[-@Motani1999c p. 484] Ophthalmosauria, which these two taxa defined.
*Nannopterygius enthekiodon* has not yet been included in a phylogenetic
analysis of ichthyosaurs, but was included within Ophthalmosauridae by
@Motani1999c [484]; this taxon is included in Ophthalmosauridae here
also. The assignment of *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* to this clade is
discussed below.
