---
title: "Genus OPHTHALMOSAURUS Seeley, 1874"
---

## Type Species

Designated by @Seeley1874 [p. 707] as *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*;
described from the Oxford Clay Formation, Peterborough, Cambridgeshire,
United Kingdom.

##  Other Species

Currently, *Ophthalmosaurus* (*'Baptanodon'*) *natans* [Marsh,
-@Marsh1879] from the Upper Jurassic of the USA is considered a member
of this genus (see
[\[synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon\]](#synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon){reference-type="ref"
reference="synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon"}); also *Ophthalmosaurus
yasykovi*[Efimov, -@Efimov1999a] from the Upper Jurassic of Russia (see
[\[OphthalmosaurusDiscussion,OicenicusDiscussion\]](#OphthalmosaurusDiscussion,OicenicusDiscussion){reference-type="ref"
reference="OphthalmosaurusDiscussion,OicenicusDiscussion"}).

## Diagnosis

Moderately large (about 4 m) member of Ophthalmosauridae characterised
by: premaxillae and dentaries divergent anteriorly (autapomorphy); small
premaxilla-lachrymal contact; maxilla excluded from external naris in
lateral view by lachrymal and premaxilla (more extensive exposure in
*Athabascasaurus, Cryopterygius, Platypterygius australis*); narial
process on nasal present (absent in *Caypullisaurus, Platypterygius*);
frontal with small participation in supratemporal fenestra (excluded in
*Athabascasaurus*; greater participation in *Platypterygius australis,
Platypterygius hercynicus, Sveltonectes*); squamosal present and
triangular (absent in *Platypterygius americanus, Platypterygius
australis*; square in *Athabascasaurus*); large orbit (\>0.2 orbital
ratio); paroccipital process slender (shared with *Acamptonectes*);
short postorbital region (broader in *Brachypterygius, Caypullisaurus,
Cryopterygius*); basioccipital with broad extracondylar area visible
around articular condyle (narrower in *Acamptonectes, Athabascasaurus,
Brachypterygius, Platypterygius*); left and right extracondylar areas of
the basioccipital separated ventrally by a ridge (continuous in
*Acamptonectes, Leninia*); stapes contacts supratemporal laterally
(shared with *Leninia*); teeth small and strongly ridged (smaller than
*Brachypterygius, Platypterygius*; weaker ridging in *Maiaspondylus,
Platypterygius americanus*);  48 (\>44) teeth present in each upper jaw
(53 in *Cryopterygius, Brachypterygius*); anterior teeth located in
sockets (autapomorphy); \~42 presacral vertebrae (48--54 in
*Platypterygius*; 52 in *Aegirosaurus, Caypullisaurus*); ribs with
anterior and posterior longitudinal grooves (rounded with single
proximal groove in *Acamptonectes*); clavicles expose interclavicle
between them at their medial meeting point (autapomorphy); clavicles
wrap around and enclose anterior bar of interclavicle (autapomorphy);
posterior margin of coracoid rounded (angled transversely in
*Nannopterygius*; squared in *Cryopterygius*); humerus with three distal
articular facets, anterior facet is the smallest, posterior facet is
deflected posteriorly, articulating with pre-axial accessory element,
radius, and ulna (two distal facets in *Cryopterygius, Nannopterygius*;
humerus articulates with radius, intermedium, and ulna in
*Brachypterygius, Maiaspondylus, Aegirosaurus*; four distal humeral
facets in *Platypterygius hercynicus*); forelimb with six digits (more
in *Caypullisaurus, Platypterygius*); ulna tapers posteriorly with a
concave posterior margin in dorsal view (shared with *Acamptonectes*);
single preaxial accessory digit (two in *Platypterygius,
Caypullisaurus*); forelimb phalanges rounded (polygonal in
*Aegirosaurus, Brachypterygius, Platypterygius*); ischium and pubis
fused and plate-like with enclosed obturator foramen (unfused distally
in *Cryopterygius, Undorosaurus*; obturator foramen lost in
*Aegirosaurus, Athabascasaurus, Platypterygius australis,
Sveltonectes*); femur with well developed dorsal and ventral processes
(larger in *Platypterygius*); femur with two distal facets (three in
*Platypterygius australis, Platypterygius hercynicus*); hindlimb
phalanges rounded (polygonal in *Platypterygius*).

## Etymology

The generic name *Ophthalmosaurus* derives from the Greek *οφθαλμός*:
'eye' and *σαύρα*: 'lizard', for the relatively and absolutely large
orbit.

## Discussion

@Seeley1874 named the new genus *Ophthalmosaurus* from Mr Charles Leeds'
collection from the Oxford Clay Formation, separating it from
*Ichthyosaurus* as the clavicles meet medially in an interdigitating
suture and wrap around the anterior of the interclavicle, and naming the
type species *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* (see
[\[OicenicusDiscussion\]](#OicenicusDiscussion){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusDiscussion"}). @Marsh1879 described *Sauranodon
natans* [Marsh, -@Marsh1879] for a specimen from the Oxfordian Sundance
Formation of the "Rocky-Mountain region" (p. 175) of North America
[indicated as Como Bluff, Wyoming, USA, in @McGowan2003 p. 115], placing
this in the new Order Sauranodonta. Later, @Marsh1880b realised
*Sauranodon* was preoccupied, and suggested the replacement name
*Baptanodon*. @Marsh1880a seemingly misinterpreted the forelimbs that he
described as hindlimbs, so that they appeared vastly different from
those of other then known ichthyosaurs. There then followed a
long-running argument as to whether *Ophthalmosaurus* and *Baptanodon*
were generically distinct; this will be discussed further below (see
[\[synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon\]](#synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon){reference-type="ref"
reference="synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon"}). Gilmore's
[-@Gilmore1902] discovery of teeth in a specimen of *Baptanodon* led him
to separate this into the genus *Microdontosaurus* [Gilmore,
-@Gilmore1902], but this name was withdrawn after teeth were found in
the holotype of *Baptanodon* [@Gilmore1903].

@Mehl1927 [@Mehl1928] described *Apatodonosaurus* [Mehl, -@Mehl1927]
from fragmentary material he described from the Sundance Formation of
Wyoming, USA. The forelimb configuration of *Apatodonosaurus* is
consistent with *Ophthalmosaurus*, although @Mehl1928 listed several
apparently unique characters; @Kirton1983 attributed this to
misinterpretation of the material. @Romer1956
[@Kirton1983; @McGowan2003] considered *Apatodonosaurus* to be a
subjective junior synonym of *Ophthalmosaurus*. @Rusconi1938
[@Rusconi1940] described new materials from the Late Jurassic of
Argentina as *Myobradypterygius* [Huene, -@Huene1927], but later erected
the genus *Ancanamunia* [Rusconi, -@Rusconi1942] for this material. A
more complete description was given by @Rusconi1948, showing features
that are consistent with *Ophthalmosaurus*. However, @Rusconi1942 did
not figure the material, and inadequate description led @Gasparini1985
to consider *Ancanamunia* a *nomen vanum* [@Fernandez2007a]. @Kirton1983
suggested that *Ancanamunia* is a subjective junior synonym of
*Ophthalmosaurus*, which was corroborated by @McGowan2003, while
@Fernandez2007a only considered material referred to *Ancanamunia
mendozana* [Rusconi, -@Rusconi1942] to be a junior subjective synonym of
*Ophthalmosaurus natans*. Much of the material that @Rusconi1938
[@Rusconi1940; @Rusconi1942; @Rusconi1948; @Rusconi1949] described is
incomplete and cannot be confidently referred to any taxon, while
material referred to *Ichthyosaurus inexpectatus* [Rusconi,
-@Rusconi1948] has since been suggested to be from the metriorhynchid
*Dakosaurus* [Quenstedt, -@Quenstedt1856]
[@Vignaud1996; @Fernandez2007a].

More recent discoveries of ichthyosaurs from the Upper Jurassic of
Russia provided the basis for several new taxa. Unfortunately, the
descriptions and figures of these are often limited, making detailed
comparisons difficult, but new efforts are being made to make these
fossils available and present revised descriptions. @Arkhangelsky1997
erected *Paraophthalmosaurus* for a new specimen with a semilunate
radius and oblique and straight posterior edges on the coracoids. A
later reinterpretation of the forelimb material changed this
[@Arkhangelsky1998]: the semilunate element was formed by fusion of the
radiale and an anterior accessory element; what was referred to as the
ulna was actually the radius; and the true ulna was not present.
Arkhangelsky's [-@Arkhangelsky1998] emended diagnosis for
*Paraophthalmosaurus* is consistent with *Ophthalmosaurus*; the two were
synonymised by @Maisch2000c [p. 78] and @McGowan2003 [p. 110]. However,
recent cladistic analysis has found that *Paraophthalmosaurus* forms a
clade separate from *Ophthalmosaurus*, although the resolution within
Ophthalmosaurinae is low [@Arkhangelsky2014]; this incorporates
*'Yasykovia' kabanovi* [Efimov, -@Efimov1999], which is revised to
*Paraophthalmosaurus kabanovi*. The girdle in *Paraophthalmosaurus
kabanovi* [@Efimov1999 figs 4ж, з] has a bipartite scapula-coracoid
articulation, divided by a coracoidal fenestra. This we have not seen in
examined British material referred to *Ophthalmosaurus*, although
@Johnson1979 and @Maisch2000c [p. 89] state it is found in other well
ossified 'stenopterygiid' and ophthalmosaurid taxa, as in
*'Stenopterygius megalorhinus'* [Huene, -@Huene1922] (= *Stenopterygius
triscissus* [Quenstedt, -@Quenstedt1858]; [@Huene1949; @Maisch2008b])
and *'Ophthalmosaurus monocharactus'* [@Gasparini1988]. Also, the femur
of *Paraophthalmosaurus kabanovi* has three distal facets [if this is
correctly identified: @Efimov1999 fig. 5г], which is different to
*Ophthalmosaurus* ([1.6](#OsteologicalComparisons){reference-type="ref"
reference="OsteologicalComparisons"}). Pending revision of the
*Paraophthalmosaurus saveljeviensis* type material, we retain
*Paraophthalmosaurus* as valid.

*Khudiakovia* [Arkhangelsky, -@Arkhangelsky1999] was erected for a
humerus, radius, ulna, radiale, and intermedium, with impressions of
surrounding elements. This specimen exhibits the features of
*Ophthalmosaurus* and was also synonymised into that genus by
@Maisch2000c [p. 90] and @McGowan2003 [p. 110].

@Efimov1999 erected four species in the genus *Yasykovia* [Efimov,
-@Efimov1999], which has clear morphological affinities with
*Ophthalmosaurus* (e.g. three distal humeral facets for the preaxial
accessory element, radius, and ulna respectively), yet did not compare
his new materials with that genus in the original notice. The
differences between the species are small, and @Maisch2000c attributed
these to ontogeny or intraspecific variation, recognising only one
species: *Yasykovia yasykovi* [Efimov, -@Efimov1999]. The figured teeth
[@Efimov1999 fig. 2] have more slender crowns and more bulbous roots
than in *Ophthalmosaurus* (see
[\[OicenicusDentition\]](#OicenicusDentition){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusDentition"}), but are otherwise similar. Most of the
pectoral girdles figured [@Efimov1999 fig. 4] are like those found in
*Ophthalmosaurus*. *Yasykovia* was not found to be sufficiently
different from *Ophthalmosaurus* to require its own generic identity by
both @Maisch2000c [pp 78, 89] and @McGowan2003 [p. 110] and was
synonymised. This view will be retained here, excluding the
*Paraophthalmosaurus kabanovi* material, although detailed reappraisal
of the material is necessary. Further discussion on specific synonymy is
included below (see
[\[OicenicusDiscussion\]](#OicenicusDiscussion){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusDiscussion"}).

Traditionally, *Ophthalmosaurus* was primarily diagnosed on the
configuration of the pectoral girdle and the three distal humeral
facets, articulating with a preaxial accessory element, the radius, and
ulna respectively (see and [@Seeley1874]). The discovery of
*Ophthalmosaurus natans* and more recent taxa, such as *Undorosaurus
gorodischensis* and *Arthropterygius chrisorum*, have reduced the latter
character's utility to family level, instead being characteristic of
several ophthalmosaurid ichthyosaur genera, but several other diagnostic
features may be used in addition (see
[\[OphthalmosaurusDiagnosis\]](#OphthalmosaurusDiagnosis){reference-type="ref"
reference="OphthalmosaurusDiagnosis"}). @Maisch2000c and @Maisch2010
referred both *Undorosaurus* [Efimov, -@Efimov1999] and *Mollesaurus*
[Fernández, -@Fernandez1999] to *Ophthalmosaurus*, arguing that the
purported differences were insubstantial, arising from poor preservation
or individual variation. @McGowan2003 agreed that all three taxa are
very similar, with few distinguishing features, but retained their
generic separation until more complete material was available. The
specimen described by @Gasparini1988 as *Ophthalmosaurus monocharactus*
is unlikely to be *Ophthalmosaurus* based on characters of the forelimb:
four distal facets (the posterior facet articulates with a posterior
accessory element), and forelimb elements more angular and closely
packed. @Maisch2000c allied this to similar German material, as
suggested by @Gasparini1988, which has since been described as
*Aegirosaurus* [@Bardet2000]. A similar humerus, with four distal
facets, from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation of Kimmeridge, UK, can be
seen in the private collection of Mr Steve Etches. Efforts are underway
to bring this material into availability.
