---
title: Geological time
date: 2011-11-29
categories:
  - geology
tags:
  - introduction
---
Wow, if all goes well this should be two posts in two days!  I hope you are as
impressed as I am.

As I promised in my last post, I am going to explain the other part of my
thesis title ‘Ichthyosaurs of the Late Jurassic’, namely the Late Jurassic
part.  Many will be familiar with the latter word from Michael Crichton’s
wonderful book and the groundbreaking-CGI-including, Spielberg-directed film
from 1993 (ironically most of the dinosaurs are from the Cretaceous, but who
cares?).

I will start by saying that geological time is vast, and vastly different to
what we humans are used to dealing with.  The processes of rock making
(usually) are so slow that talking about them on the human time scale of days,
years or even millennia quickly becomes cumbersome.  I will be discussing these
at a later date.  When dealing with the immense timespans inherent in geology,
actually getting an age in the first place for your rock is nigh on impossible
itself.

Much geology, and certainly the relevant part for my PhD, works on a scale of
millions of years.  For instance, the Jurassic is defined as the period between
199.6±0.6–145.5±4.0 million years ago (Ogg, Ogg and Gradstein 2008).  The units
are usually shortened to ‘mya’ or ‘Ma’ (for mega-annum).  As you can see from
the upper bound, there can be quite a lot of uncertainty: 8 Ma, but this is
still only 5.5% difference.  The Earth is currently believed to be about
4 500 Ma (4.5 billion years or Ga) old.  Life itself is thought to have arisen
~3 800 Ma, originally as single-celled organisms.  More complex life is first
found from ~600 Ma whereas the first animals with hard shells are from ~550 Ma.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/Earth-system.jpg" alt="A time scale of earth history" caption="The history of the Earth with chronostratigraphic divisions based upon Ogg et al. (2008). Key events are also present and will be added to over time. (Click to view larger version.)" %}

To try and coherently explain the length of time involved, it is usually
transferred to the timescale of a year: ‘if the whole of Earth history was
compressed into one year…’  The crux of this is that you see that life has been
around for a long time (since the end of February), but spent most of that time
be very simple and solitary.  Complex life doesn’t really manifest itself until
the last ¹⁄₇ th of Earth’s history (13 November).  The dinosaurs appear on 11
December and become extinct 15 days later.  Humans appear within the last four
hours and I was born less than a second before twelve midnight!

In terms of life, most study is done on the most recent 542 Ma.  This is the
time since the ‘Cambrian Explosion’ where there was a surge in diversity and
increase in preservation potential due to the evolution of hard body parts,
such as shells and skeletons.  My study will be focussed on the Jurassic Period
(200–146 Ma) particularly to last 20 Ma.  I will also look at ichthyosaurs from
their whole span in the Mesozoic era (~240–~90 Ma).

## References

OGG, J. G., OGG, G. and GRADSTEIN, F. M. 2008. _The Concise Geologic Time
Scale_. Cambridge University Press, New York, 184 pp.

Source data for the chart above can be found [here](http://www.stratigraphy.org/column.php?id=Chart/Time%20Scale).
