---
title: It's fun to stay at the SVPCA!
date: 2012-09-13
categories:
  - conferences
tags:
  - anatomy
  - biology
  - biomechanics
  - disparity
  - evolution
  - extinction
  - finite element analysis
  - fun
  - geology
  - palaeontology
  - phylogeny
  - taxonomy
  - comparative anatomy
  - conference
  - crocodiles
  - dinosaurs
  - ichthyosaurs
  - nature
  - paleontology
  - plesiosaurs
  - pliosaurs
  - science
  - SVPCA
toc: true
---

Yesterday, I was in Oxford, at the Natural History Museum for the annual
set of joy that is the [Symposium of Vertebrate Palaeontology and
Comparative Anatomy](http://svpca.org "SVPCA") (SVPCA). Sadly I could
only be there for the day, although the symposium is a week long.
Conferences are always fun; there are interesting talks, meeting old
friends again, making new acquaintances and large amounts of free tea
and alcohol! (It’ doesn’t all have to be hard work.)

## New and now stuff

There were 16 talks throughout the day yesterday, fortunately spread out
with a lunch and tea breaks. I couldn’t get to the ichthyosaur talk (not
just an ichthyosaur talk, but *the* ichthyosaur talk\!) on Tuesday.
(This was a change from last year where much of a day was spent on
ichthyosaurs and other marine reptiles.) However, there were many other
talks to satisfy me including:

  - Work on the Weymouth Bay Pliosaur, taxonomy and function.
  - Enigmatic archosaurs.
  - Pterosaur ontogeny and evolution.
  - Dinosaurs, of course.

As comparative anatomy suggests, this was a chance to show many pictures
of fossil bones, which is what many of us go to see. There was of course
the odd set of graphs, but fortunately they were coloured to take the
edge off.

## Many meetings

Meeting people is always fun (as long as you have something to say).
It’s good to talk about their work, your work and everything in
between. Yesterday, was a chance to grab a present (a *Bulletin of the
British Museum  (Natural History)*) from Sam Bennett of Royal Holloway,
London, and discuss with him, Dean Lomax of Doncaster Museum, and Paul
Barrett, Natural History Museum, London, about potential ichthyosaur
work that needs to be done there. I also spoke to Darren Naisch (not
Nash), Southampton University, about Upper Jurassic ichthyosaurs and
further projects.

Most exciting are some of the new people you get to meet. Yesterday,
after passing a few emails between us, I finally had the chance to meet
Aubrey Roberts. Aubrey is a Masters student at the University of Oslo,
working on the Upper Jurassic ichthyosaurs from Spitsbergen. Having
lived in Norway for a long time, she retains an excellent British
accent, a reminder that she was born in Hampshire! Aubrey also showed
me many exciting specimens of the weird-looking ichthyosaurs she’s
working on. You can stalk Aubrey
[here](http://www.masterbloggen.no/blog/author/aubrey/ "Aubrey Roberts stuff"),
and see all the exciting fieldwork she’s been doing. The website is in
Norwegian, but Google Translate will cut through that easily… probably.

It was also good to see many of my chums and chummettes (WordPress
thinks that should be corrected to 'courgettes') from Portsmouth
University. Shout-out to Luke, one of the [*Ancient
Anglers*](http://ancientanglers.wordpress.com "Ancient Anglers");
[Mark](http://www.markwitton.com "Mark Witton homepage"), who drew most
of the pterosaurs yesterday; Georgia, for wanting to meet Mike Benton;
Irish Mike, for that moustache and any others whom I haven’t listed.

