---
title: Reaching out to teach
date: 2012-05-28
categories:
  - outreach
tags:
  - open access
  - fun
  - palaeontology
  - what I read today
  - Bristol
  - public outreach programs
  - science
  - Science in Society
  - Science outreach
  - Scientist
toc: true
layout: long_post
---

This past month I’ve been thinking a bit about public outreach in
science.  Several things have spurred this on:

  - Two papers in [*PLoS ONE*](http://www.plosone.org/home.action); one
    about scientists perceptions of outreach and the other on the
    citation value of science
    [blogs](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blog "Blog").
  - The [DinoZoo](http://www.bristolzoo.org.uk/dinozoo) exhibition
    coming to [Bristol Zoo
    Gardens](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bristol_Zoo "Bristol Zoo"),
    featuring several large animatronic models of dinosaurs.
  - Recently visiting a school with the [Bristol Dinosaur
    Project](http://www.thebristoldinosaurproject.org.uk/) to teach
    about local science and work that the University does.

So what is this outreach thing and what do people think of it?

## **Outreach in science**

We scientists spend a lot of our time researching, and from this we find
out a lot of stuff.  Some of this can be quite technical or need lateral
(or occasionally nonsensical) thinking that most scientists wouldn’t
easily comprehend, let alone non-scientists.  The thing is, much of this
research is done using money from research councils, which themselves
get money from public taxes.  Thus, something is owed to the public that
funded the research.

This can come in many forms:

  - The research papers that officially announces the results and
    implications of the research.  This is where much of the
    interpretation of the data and its potential uses ends up.  Recently
    this has been criticised as the paper often ends up behind a paywall
    that many people can’t get through without dishing out more money.
  - Internet/intranet databases hold much of the raw data, especially if
    there’s too much to go into a published article and requires a
    certain filetype.  Again, access will be restricted.  the purpose of
    this is to prevent stealing or meddling with sensitive data, but
    also to keep whoever holds it at the forefront of its use.  This and
    the first point will need a decent amount of specialist knowledge to
    use.
  - Public outreach programs are hosted by various institutions.  Their
    purpose is to go into schools, shopping centres, parks etc and show
    the work done by that institution in a way that is both
    comprehendible and memorable.  The outreach format varies: talks,
    workshops, field trips and so on.  At the University of Bristol,
    there are several projects, in particular I am involved with the
    Bristol Dinosaur Project.

## **What do scientists think?**

On 30 April 2012, *PLoS ONE* published an article ‘How academic
biologists and physicists view [science
outreach](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Science_outreach "Science outreach")’
(Ecklund, James and Lincoln 2012).  The premise is simple: ask several
academics what they think of outreach and then analyse the results.  Out
of this come many statistics, such as the ratio of women to men who are
involved in outreach (72% women to 43% men) and the number of graduate
students (54%) compared to postdoctoral fellows (33%).

More interesting is the perceived problems associated with outreach:

> Seventy-four percent of respondents list one or more significant
> impediments to their ability to do science outreach, yet less than
> half have concrete ideas for how science outreach could be improved
> *(Ecklund, James and Lincoln 2012, pg. 3).*

Those who want to spend their life working specifically in science
outreach have often faced disapproval whilst in academic training.  The
article splits the problems into three categories:

  - Scientists: poor interpersonal and communication skills; 5% say some
    do not see it as part of their role as a scientist; 15% think
    non-scientists should organise scientists’ outreach efforts.
  - The Academy: universities value research above all else; lack of
    outreach infrastructure; lack of recognition for outreach
    activities.
  - The Public: potentially disinterested, mistrustful or ignorant;
    perception of scientists as snobby; lack of interest in science.

Some of these problems can be solved simply, although not necessarily
easily: give scientists the ability to broadcast their research in a way
that is both comprehendible and exciting to the non-scientific
community.  This must work both ways: the public need have enough of the
required knowledge and interest instilled in them.  For obvious reasons,
this does not mean that the entirety of the public must know everything
about the whole of science, in the same way that researchers focus on
one area only.

## **Spreading the understanding**

An easy, and one of the most popular way to spread the knowledge one
accrues, whether through research, travel or life generally, is the
personal, or group blog.  These have become vastly popular:
WordPress.com reports 460 015 bloggers today, as I write this. Shema,
Bar-Ilan and Thelwall (2012) looked at the perception of research blogs
and the bloggers’ demographics, similar to the study above on outreach. 
They found that most of the research blogs they sampled (limited to less
than two authors with over 20 posts within a year) were written by men
(67%), most (72%) were linked to twitter and about one-third were
written by PhD students — all of which are where I fall.

So, how good are these blogs?  As a way of spreading information, they
are pretty darn good; written word and all that.  Blogs are available
when and wherever you have an internet connection; they are regularly
indexed by various search engines; there is some store somewhere,
digital and/or physical, where are this data is being stored for
posterity.  Written explanations also allow people to take a break and
resume later, which can’t happen in a presentation or workshop.  You can
offer in-text links, pictures, videos, music and all other manner of
wonderful stuff.  At the end of a blog, you’ll frequently see a comments
section, which is great for discussions on the posted topic (assuming
you aren’t continuously trolled).  Please do use the comment field at
the bottom of articles to spread your thoughts and have discussion.

I find myself reading blogs often; I have a few set up in my RSS reader
so I automatically get the newest posts as they come up.  Speaking from
my own experience, it’s always good when you see the counter on the
right going up and up from views (most of these may be from me checking
how many people have looked).  These blogs are even catalogued for the
papers that they mention, thus counting for various metrics that measure
influence.

## **The smelly side of publicity**

They do say that all publicity is good publicity, although I don’t know
who ‘they’ are exactly.  This is not true.  In the case of a particular
paper it put a bit of a stink on things; I’m talking particularly about
‘Could methane produced by sauropod dinosaurs have helped drive
Mesozoic climate warmth?’ (Wilkinson, Nisbet and Ruxton 2012).  In a lab
group, we pulled it apart and found a lot to question about the methods,
much has been summed up by David Button at
[*EvoPalaeo*](http://evopalaeo.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/hypothetical-sauropod-flatulence-little.html) and
John Tennant over at [*Green Tea and
Velociraptors*](http://fossilsandshit.wordpress.com/2012/05/08/dinosaur-farts-and-global-warming-a-crude-analysis/). 
However, rather than just being a proof of concept in showing the
calculation could be done (and could be done more respectably in more
than two pages), it caused a bit of a flurry in the media. 
Unfortunately from my point of view, these newspapers decided to go with
the title ‘Dinosaur farts led to global warming’, or something along
those lines.

Now, we all enjoy a good fart now and then, but to have many
international news networks spring alive to take this story for a ride
doesn’t really paint dinosaurologists in the best of lights.  I do not
blame the authors of the article for this; dinosaur farts have been
discussed before and how would they know the article would receive the
attention that it did.  The problem mainly stems from the media who
reported this took the plausible, if not fully justified, conclusion of
the paper — the sauropods added much methane to the atmosphere during
the ‘Mesozoic’ (although extrapolated from the Kimmeridgian–Tithonian
Morrison Formation) — and went through ‘sauropod farts caused global
warming’ to ‘dinosaurs farted their way to extinction’.  This is a part
of the ignorance that scientists see when dealing with the public. 
Fortunately, the case of the dinosaur farts is a rare occurrence in the
world of outreach: people are intelligent and skeptical enough to take
such things with a pinch of salt.  Yet, it is not good if the infrequent
appearances of dinosaurs in the news comes as toilet humour.

For those of you who come here looking for ichthyosaurs, don’t worry
there’s something special coming along soon!

## **References**

[ECKLUND, E. H., JAMES, S. A. and LINCOLN, A. E. 2012. How academic
biologists and physicists view science outreach. *PLoS ONE*, **7**,
e36240:5p.](http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0036240 "PLoS ONE e36240")

[SHEMA, H., BAR-ILAN, J. and THELWALL, M. 2012. Research blogs and the
discussion of scholarly information. *PLoS ONE*, **7**,
e35869:8p.](http://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0035869.t001 "PLoS ONE e35869")

[WILKINSON, D. M., NISBET, E. G. and RUXTON, G. D. 2012. Could methane
produced by sauropod dinosaurs have helped drive Mesozoic climate
warmth? *Current Biology*, **22**,
R292–R293.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2012.03.042 "Wilkinson farting dinosaurs")

