---
title: A shadow grows in Academia
date: 2012-05-02
categories:
  - open access
tags:
  - Academic journal
  - Google
  - Open access
  - Peer review
  - Publishing
---

Hi there, and how are you?  Do you remember me?  I occasionally blog
here.

Recently the usually serene (ha\!) world of academia has been set alight
by the tumultuous uproar of what has become known as the ‘[Academic
Spring](http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/2012/apr/09/frustrated-blogpost-boycott-scientific-journals)’. 
Many, including myself, have long been thwarted in attempts to get
access to research online by paywalls and the dreaded ‘access to this
article is restricted’ sign.  This had been left as ‘part of the
system’, not the best part, but the just way it worked.  However,
change is afoot, and growing in popularity, support and power.  For
today, here’s some history.

Since a very long time ago, the only way to tell people about what you
had found out in your philosophical deliberations was to write about
it.  [Aristotle](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aristotle "Aristotle")
and
[Pliny](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pliny_the_Elder "Pliny the Elder")
wrote reams of material about anything that passed their mind.  In the
mid-Seventeenth Century, the first [scientific
journals](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scientific_journal "Scientific journal")
appeared, such as the *[Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philosophical_Transactions_of_the_Royal_Society "Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society")*,
which are a great way to spread your research in small steps, without
having to write about everything all in one.  This has stuck with us
until the present day, because it works: you do some research, writes it
up and send it to a journal.  The editor sends it a few other scientists
to check the science has been done properly — this is [peer
review](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peer_review), the cornerstone of
modern science dissemination — and asks the author for changes and
clarifications etc.  Once everyone’s accepted this, the article is
published and the world can see what you’ve done.

Except, as it is, not everyone can see your work.  The majority of
journals are published by only a few large publishing groups, e.g.
Elsevier and Springer.  To be able to find a journal and download an
article you must have access — either through a library, personal
subscription or by paying there and then — which can cost anywhere from
£10 (e.g. *Palaeontology* individual student subscription) through to
£20 000 (e.g. *Nature* institutional subscription) and beyond.  You
might expect this, considering all the services mentioned above that the
journal provides — editing, review, formatting, dissemination… but, for
many purely academic journals, these are done free of charge by the
editors, willing scientists (peer review) and by the author (much of the
formatting).

So what do the publishers offer?  Well, they do make print copies and
send them to subscribers — but most people now use computers and the
internet for research, downloading in .pdf format.  Each journal will
have a website managed by their respective publishers, which costs — but
I can set up a website, as I have done with this blog, for free.  I
could upload articles I’ve written (there’s a free 1 GB upload limit on
WordPress), so that they are available to the world — peer review could
be requested by me sending manuscripts to experts in the field; whether
they’ll be interested in doing this will depend upon time and
commitments.  On journal websites, you know your work will be found —
but with the joy of
[Google](http://www.zdnet.com/topics/google+inc.?tag=header;header-sec "Google"),
and its constant indexing of websites, so is this blog: it was hit №32,
when I searched for ‘ichthyosaurs’ and top hit if I search for a
specific post title (e.g. ‘who’s useless at writing a blog?’; which is
how I often search for papers).  Searching Google for ‘new
ophthalmosaurid ichthyosaurs’ brings up [this
paper](http://www.plosone.org/article/info:doi/10.1371/journal.pone.0029234)
(the one I wanted) at the top.

In summary, it is not difficult for me to do much the same as an
established journal here, sitting at my computer in the University of
Bristol.  It may not have the same prestige as publishing in *Nature* or
*Science*.  The main problem I can see is that the reference to an
article posted on a blog may not be as desirable as one in a journal,
even though it may have gone through the same level of criticism.  It
could also take up a bit of my time, leaving less for sleeping.

Fortunately, there is an alternative to pay for access publishing: [OPEN
ACCESS](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_access "Open access"), which
will be the subject of another post soon.

