---
title: Of Leicester, the apple in its own eye
date: 2012-09-01
categories:
  - palaeontology
tags:
  - anatomy
  - ichthyosaur
  - ichthyosaurs
  - Jurassic
  - museum
  - nature
  - osteology
  - oxford clay
  - peterborough area
  - reptile
  - science
  - Science in Society
  - scientific names of organisms
  - travel
  - Vertebrate
---
~~This past week~~ A few weeks ago, at the beginning of August, I went
to Leicester; ‘why’ you might ask? That’s a very good question, and one
that I might not be able to answer if I didn’t already have a reason for
being there. Y’see, the wonderful thing about palaeontology is the
abundance of fossils that one can, and indeed must, study, look at,
fondle and generally enjoy. (Occasional trips to bathroom may be needed
if the experience proves too stimulating.)

The thing about Leicester is that is has a museum (actually it has
several, but let’s ignore the rest for now), rather nicely titled the
New Walk Museum; however, this is rather unimaginative as it is located
on New Walk. Hidden within the bowels of the New Walk Museum, where few
people dare to tread (not entirely without reason) are the concealed
treasures that every such place possesses.

So why did I go to Leicester particularly? The museum houses a large
collection of material from the Oxford Clay Formation of the
Peterborough area. Much of this was collected in the late Nineteenth and
early Twentieth Century and later donated by a Mr R. Swales. Of course,
collecting from the Oxford Clay at this time was highly fashionable:
Alfred Leeds had recently sold a sizeable collection to the British
Museum of Natural History (now the Natural History Museum) in London and
was on his way to making another one. The Oxford Clay is famous for the
amount of vertebrate material found in the basal ‘_Gryphaea_ and Reptile
Beds’, including one ichthyosaur in particular: *Ophthalmosaurus*. The
collections at Leicester are significant; I counted around
100 individual catalogue numbers, with many of those having several
pieces or elements included, a lot of which I photographed.

So, what did I learn? For me, quite a bit, having not had the chance to
take a lengthy, up-close look at ichthyosaur material before (only
isolated days at the Natural History Museum). As for our knowledge of
*Ophthalmosaurus*, I happily looked at and confirmed the most recent
descriptions; what more can you ask? This work, I will continue up to
the end of this year.

So, as a way to not have a post consisting entirely of text, I took some
photographs of the underbelly of the New Walk Museum, just so those who
may not visit such places can have a look. I’d like to thank Mark Evans
for hosting me in the museum and helping with finding the specimens and
taking the photographs.

While this is a small and unassuming post, I am sorting through the
photographs that I took in Leicester and will post a few of the finer
ones, once they have been processed.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/leicester-nwm-interior.jpg" alt="Leicester New Walk Museum collections" caption="The hidden bowels of the New Walk Museum, Leicester, showing the collections on shelves, trolleys and in drawers in cupboards in stacks on rollers." %}

**Edit** (02/09/2012): Line 1, changed timing as draught was begun long before posting; italicised generic names.
{: .notice}

