---
title: In the land of Svalbard...
date: 2012-11-20
categories:
  - ichthyosaurs
tags:
  - biology
  - evolution
  - palaeontology
  - taxonomy
  - anatomy
  - fossil
  - Jurassic
  - marine reptile
  - Mesozoic
  - nature
  - osteology
  - reptile
  - research
  - science
  - scientific names of organisms
  - svalbard norway
  - vertebrate palaeontology
toc: true
---

## Introduction

As I promised, here is a longer post looking at the ichthyosaurs
recently described  (Druckenmiller *et al.* 2012), and more about
palaeontological research, in the land of Svalbard. The original
article, with descriptions and many images, can be accessed
[here](http://www.geologi.no/cgi-bin/geologi/imaker?id=6862&visdybde=1&aktiv=6862 "Norwegian Journal of Geology, v.92, n.2–3"),
it's open access <i class="ai ai-open-access"></i>. This post will be more formally set out for three
reasons: (1) I’m trying a new program to see whether this can streamline
my thought and writing (2) there’s been a lot of research, particularly
recently, to come from Svalbard (3) I haven’t written at any length for
a while, so I thought I should.

While the northern parts of the World have received much attention due
to climatic changes (which are happening whether or not you believe this
has been caused by human burning of fossil fuels), significant coverage
by ice does not lend itself to geological fieldwork easily. Svalbard is
an archipelago of Norway, 400 miles north of mainland Europe. The main
island, Spitsbergen, is the largest and most inhabited of the
archipelago, and where much of the research to be discussed took place.
In the middle of the west coast of Spitsbergen, is the inlet of
Isfjorden. The research took place on the southern coast of this,
Northwest of Longyearbyen. The fieldwork recovered many fossils,
identifying a new marine reptile lagerstätte — the Slottsmøya Member —
and the recent *Norwegian Journal of Geology* has many papers on the
plesiosaurs. In addition, there is an article on two new
opthalmosaurids: *Cryopterygius kristiansenae* and *Palvennia
hoybergeti*.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/druckenmilleretal_2012_geology.jpg" alt="Svalbard geology" caption="The geology on the southern bank of the Isfjord, Svalbard (inset), showing the local geology and location of the finds. From Druckenmiller et al. 2012." %}

## History of ichthyosaur palaeontology in Svalbard

Svalbard has been a haven of vertebrate palaeontology research for over
100 years. Much has been done on the Triassic material (Cox and Smith
1973). Some of the earliest collections were by Nordenskiöld in 1864 and
1868, and described by Hulke (1873). These included ichthyosaur remains
for which Hulke erected *Ichthyosaurus* *nordenskioeldii* and
*Ichthyosaurus* *polaris* (later referred to *Mixosaurus* (Baur 1887)).
Wiman (1910) later reappraised this and erected *Pessosaurus* for
*Ichthyosaurus polaris* and described four new species for which he
created the genus *Pessopteryx*. Merriam (1911) commented on this, the
scrappy nature of the material, and how *Pessopteryx*  was similar in
form to *Omphalosaurus*. It was also from the Triassic of Svalbard that
Wiman described the then most basal ichthyosaurian taxon *Grippia
longirostris* (Wiman 1929). From then until the 1980s, there was little
work done on the ichthyosaur fauna of Svalbard. Mazin (1981; 1983)
restarted this with work on *Grippia* and the probable ichthyosaur
*Omphalosaurus*. At this time the main attraction of Svalbard, in terms
of ichthyosaurs, continued to be the Triassic (Sander 1992; 1998; Maisch
and Matzke 2002; 2003). While there is a large body of research on the
Triassic ichthyosaurs of Svalbard, there are almost none on those from
the Jurassic. Plesiosaurs have been studied to a limited extent too, but
the only example of a Jurassic ichthyosaur is a rostrum assigned to
*Brachypterygius* (Angst *et al.* 2010).

## *Cryopterygius kristiansenae*

This new genus and species, *Cryopterygius kristiansenae*, is a large
ichthyosaur, especially for the Late Jurassic, about 5.5 m long. Many
features make this ichthyosaur different from others; the diagnosis
takes up most of a column. What is great about this specimen is that it
is very complete and exceptionally preserved—another of the papers in
the issue is about the Slottsmøya Member lagerstätte, where this
ichthyosaur was found. So, what makes this ichthyosaur different from
others?

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/druckenmilleretal_2012_cryopterygius.jpg" alt="Cryopterygius kristiansenae" caption="_Cryopterygius kristiansenae_ near-complete skeleton showing the left side. the skull and forepaddle are clearly preserved in profile. From Druckenmiller et al. 2012." %}

Well, there are mix of many small differences, which add up to quite a
big difference, and many more noticeable. The differential diagnosis,
where the important differences are set out, lists about 20 characters,
three of which are unique among ichthyosaurs, or its closer family
(autapomorphic): a distinct 90° angle at the posterior of the lachrymal,
an element behind the quadratojugal with a ventral projection, V-shaped
notch on the dorsal margin of the presacral neural spines. Another
visible difference, and important from my point of view, is in the
forepaddle. In *Ophthalmosaurus*, the humerus contacts three bones of
the hands, and the same is found in *Brachypterygius*. However, in
*Cryopterygius*, there are only two facets, for articulation with two
bones. This is similar to that found in both the Lower Jurassic, such as
*Ichthyosaurus*, but also in the Cretaceous *Platypterygius*. Also
interesting is that the bones of the hand are clearly more polygonal
than the British species from a similar time, although there is quite a
bit of variation. The pelvis as usual, is small and does not contact the
vertebral column. The ischiopubis has a prong that sticks out to the
front, the gap between most likely allowed nerves to pass through.

## *Palvennia hoybergeti*

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/druckenmilleretal_2012_palvennia.jpg" alt="Palvennia hoybergeti" caption="_Palvennia hoybergeti_, skull in dorsal(ish) view. The skull has been crushed so that the side can also be seen. From Druckenmiller et al. 2012." %}

The other new ichthyosaur *Palvennia hoybergeti*, is not as complete as
*Cryopterygius*: it is only know from a skull, and then you can only
really see the top and bottom\! This skull is over 80 cm, making
*Palvennia* a medium- to large-sized ichthyosaur. The only autapomorphy
is the very large pineal foramen, a hole in the top of the skull.
However, *Palvennia* is also noteworthy in having a very high orbital
ratio (McGowan 1976). This is a measure of the relative size of the eye,
by comparing the size of the eye socket (orbit) to the length of the
lower jaw. In *Ophthalmosaurus*, this ratio is 0.27: the eye is about ¼
the length of the lower jaw; *Palvennia* has an orbital ratio of 0.32,
about ⅓ the length of the lower jaw.

## And finally

This has been a brief overview of the ichthyosaurs themselves. The
article (Druckenmiller *et al.* 2012) shows the images which I’ve used
to illustrate, and has the full descriptions. There is also a lengthy
comparison between *Cryopterygius* and *Palvennia* respectively and
other ichthyosaurs from the Jurassic and Cretaceous. *Cryopterygius* is
compared most closely to the Russian *Undorosaurus*, from a similar
time, however the authors note that the validity of *Undorosaurus* is
questionable. *Palvennia* on the other hand shows subtle differences and
broad similarities to many coeval ichthyosaurs; the lack of material
from behind the skull means that being more conclusive in comparisons is
difficult.

## References

ANGST, D., BUFFETAUT, E., TABOUELLE, J. and TONG, H. 2010. An
ichthyosaur skull from the Late Jurassic of Svalbard. *Bulletin de la
Société Géologique de France*, **181**, 453–458.

BAUR, G. 1887. On the morphology and origin of the Ichthyopterygia. *The
American Naturalist*, **21**, 837–840.

COX, C. B. and SMITH, D. G. 1973. Review of Triassic vertebrate faunas
of Svalbard. *Geological Magazine*, **110**, 405–418.

DRUCKENMILLER, P. S., HURUM, J. H., KNUTSEN, E. M. and NAKREM, H. A.
2012. Two new ophthalmosaurids (Reptilia: Ichthyosauria) from the
Agardhfjellet Formation (Upper Jurassic: Volgian/Tithonian), Svalbard,
Norway. *Norwegian Journal of Geology*, **92**, 311–339.

HULKE, J. W. 1873. Fossil vertebrate remains collected by the Swedish
Expeditions to Spitzbergen in 1864 and 1868. *Bihang till Kongliga
Svenska Vetenskaps-Akademiens Handlingar*, **1**, 1–11.

MAISCH, M. W. and MATZKE, A. T. 2002. The skull of a large Lower
Triassic ichthyosaur from Spitzbergen and its implications for the
origin of the Ichthyosauria. *Lethaia*, **35**, 250–256.

—— and —— 2003. Observations on Triassic ichthyosaurs. Part XII. A new
Early Triassic ichthyosaur genus from Spitzbergen. *Neues Jahrbuch für
Geologie und Paläontologie—Abhandlungen*, **229**, 317–338.

MAZIN, J.-M. 1981. *Grippia longirostris* Wiman, 1929, un
Ichthyopterygia primitif du Trias inférieur du Spitsberg. *Bulletin de
la Muséum National de Histoire Natural, Paris, Quartiéme Série*, **3**,
317–348.

—— 1983. *Omphalosaurus nisseri* (Wiman, 1910), un ichthyoptérygien à
denture broyeuse du Trias moyen du Spitsberg. *Bulletin de la Muséum
National de Histoire Natural, Paris, Quartiéme Série*, **5**, 243–263.

MCGOWAN, C. 1976. The description and phenetic relationships of a new
ichthyosaur genus from the Upper Jurassic of England. *Canadian Journal
of Earth Sciences*, **13**, 668–683.

MERRIAM, J. C. 1911. Notes on the relationships of the marine saurian
fauna described from the Triassic of Spitzbergen by Wiman. *University
of California, Bulletin of the Department of Geology*, **6**, 317–327.

SANDER, P. M. 1992. *Cymbospondylus* (Shastasauridae, Ichthyosauria)
from the Middle Triassic of Spitsbergen: filling a paleobiogeographic
gap. *Journal of Paleontology*, **66**, 332–337.

—— 1998. New finds of *Omphalosaurus* and a review of Triassic
ichthyosaur paleobiogeography. *Paläontologische Zeitschrift*.

WIMAN, C. 1910. Ichthyosaurier aus der Trias Spitzbergens. *Bulletin of
the Geological Institute of Upsala*, **10**, 124–148.

—— 1929. Eine neue marine Reptilien-Ordnung aus der Trias Spitzbergens.
*Bulletin of the Geological Institute of Upsala*, **22**, 1–14.

