---
title: Pages and pages and pages
date: 2012-09-11
categories:
  - palaeontology
tags:
  - taxonomy
  - disparity
  - evolution
  - ichthyosaurs
  - biology
  - classifying organisms
  - ICZN
  - international code of zoological nomenclature
  - leidy
  - list
  - Mesozoic
  - nature
  - nomenclature
  - paleontology
  - reptile
  - science
  - Science outreach
toc: true
---

*Ichthyosaurs: a day in the life…* is growing, the website that is.
Following a hectic week of much reference checking and cross-checking, I
have compiled a list: a [list of
ichthyosaurs](http://ichthyosaurs.wordpress.com/ichthyosaur-palaeontology/ichthyosaur-taxonomy/ "Ichthyosaur taxonomy").

You can find this list in the new ‘Ichthyosaur palaeontology’ tab at the
top of the page. From that I’m sure that you can guess my aspirations.
While there are many aspects of ichthyosaur palaeontology that can
change rapidly, having such basic data can be important to keep up stock
of the science. It also provides the ‘canvas’ to be worked upon within
any particular group.

## Taxonomy-nommy-nom-nom

This list is on the page entitled ‘Ichthyosaur taxonomy’. Taxonomy is
the study of classifying organisms; plants, fungi, animals and more.
Particularly, taxonomy, specifically ‘alpha taxonomy’ is concerned with
the description, identification and naming of organisms. So this page of
ichthyosaur taxonomy features a list of all valid ichthyosaur names,
arranged alphabetically. As I’ve said before, and reminded last week,
the naming of organisms is regulated by the International Code of
Zoological Nomenclature. Each name has two parts: generic and specific,
usually with the name of the first author following this.

The author included is the first to describe and name the species
itself, so includes the author(s) surnames and the year of publication.
This may or may not be enclosed in brackets: no brackets means that the
name is the same as originally published, e.g. *Cymbospondylus piscosus*
Leidy, 1868 was first named by Leidy in 1868, and hasn’t been changed.

Sometimes, the names of organisms can change. This may be because the
name is given to a species which has been named before, or if the name
has been used before. It can also happen if new material means that the
genus should be changed. An example would be *Ichthyosaurus enthekiodon*
Hulke, 1871 (as originally named by Hulke in 1871). The generic name was
changed by Huene in 1922 to separate it from other *Ichthyosaurus*. So
the genus is *Nannopterygius* Huene, 1922, but the species became
*Nannopterygius enthekiodon* (Hulke, 1871).

## The list itself

There are a few things that can be taken simply from the list, mostly
related to diversity. The ~~108~~ 98 species in 53 genera mean that many
genera have only a single species. This is at odds with the state about
100 years ago, when all species were placed in only a few taxa
(*Ichthyosaurus* was the only genus from 1818 until 1874, when Seeley
erected *Ophthalmosaurus*). That situation is still found, particularly
in the Cretaceous genus *Platypterygius* (11 genera), but also in
*Ichthyosaurus* (5 genera), *Temnodontosaurus* (5 genera) and
*Ophthalmosaurus* (4 genera). McGowan and Motani (2003, *Handbook of
Paleoherpetology*) suggested that some genera should be synonymised,
including questioning the relatively high diversity from the Middle
Triassic Grenzbitumenzone in Switzerland and Italy. A later version will
hopefully include all non-valid taxa, for whatever reason, too. This
will show the development of ichthyosaur study through time.

