---
title: 'Brevis: What on Earth is Palaeontology?'
date: 2012-01-31
categories:
  - brevis
tags:
  - introduction
  - palaeontology
---
These *brevia* (using Latin so you can feel even better about reading
this blog!) will be a series of short pieces about important or
relevant topics that are not the main focus of my work.  As you can see
from the title, this will include topics such as a description of
palaeontological study and, in the future, a history of study.  The idea
is that, writing a shorter article should keep me should keep me going
on the writing front.  I’m sure you will have noticed, as I have, that
my posting hasn’t been as regular as I had hoped, so this should
somewhat alleviate that.

Palaeontology (US paleontology; PAL-ee-on-TOL-oh-jee) is the study of
ancient life on Earth.  The name derives from the Greek παλαιός, ὂν and
λόγος meaning “study of ancient beings” (OED; Wikipedia).  Modern
palaeontology covers a huge range of topics from dinosaurs and
ichthyosaurs through the traces left by animals and bacteria to the
evolution of the biosphere itself.  Over the past three centuries, this
science has evolved as much as the organisms it studies — expect a
history in the next *brevis*.

Modern palaeontology has many fronts and uses.  The main ones, globally
and from my point of view, include vertebrate palaeontology,
biostratigraphy and palaeoclimatology.

## Vertebrate Palaeontology

This is possibly the smallest use of palaeontology, yet has the greatest
public exposure.  This is largely thanks to the spectacular fossils that
vertebrates produce, but also to their appearances in popular culture —
e.g. Jurassic Park.  Of course, the most famous prehistoric animals, of
any type, are the dinosaurs.  These magnificent grace many musea floors
as well as children’s (and in my case, young adult’s) walls and
windowsills.  Many people have had many suggestions as to why dinosaurs
are so popular.  I’ve heard it said that they represent another position
of authority to respect, although annoy and rebel against seems more
opt\!

Vertebrate palaeontology covers much more than dinosaurs, and
ichthyosaurs.  There were many fish, reptiles and amphibians before and
since, and many mammals followed after the dinosaurs’ extinction. 
Although these are less often seen, they are as, or more, fascinating,
particularly in the variety of weird forms that they had.  To give some
examples, some early land vertebrates, from \~350 Ma had up to eight
toes (*Hynerpeton*); fish developed heads with inch-thick armour
(*Dunkleosteus*) and others evolved jaws over two metres long
(*Stretosaurus*)!

## Biostratigraphy

Stratigraphy is one of the basic tools of geology.  Is uses the
relationship of the rocks in one place to discover the history of
another.  The bio- part in this comes when fossils are used to assist
this.  Imagine having a section of rock that contains the fossils A, B
and C sequentially, one above the other.  If you then go to another
section and find fossil A only, you can line up the sequences.  If you
find B and C only, you can again correlate them.

The interesting part comes when you find a sequence with only fossils A
and C.  Many things can cause this:

  - Fossil B did not live there because of e.g. the environment.
  - The rock with Fossil B in was not deposited there.
  - The rock with Fossil B was deposited, but eroded before the rock
    with Fossil C was deposited — an unconformity.
  
{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/biostratigraphy.jpg" alt="Example of biostratigraphy" caption="Example of correlation over sections using fossils. Each stratum with a certain fossil was deposited at a certain time. The different thicknesses can be caused by different sedimentation rates or the spread of the species itself. Where there is no occurrence, indicates that so sediment was deposited, the species could not colonise that environment or there has been erosion causing an unconformity." %}

When working in the real world, stratigraphy is much more complicated
than flat beds overlying each other.  The beds are tilted, overlap and
phase in and out.  The fossils can also be found at different levels,
overlapping and in particular assemblages.  The mix of these defines
recognised Biostratigraphical Zones (biozones for short).  Fossils used
include the coiled ammonites, fossil pollen and spores and enigmatic
creatures called graptolites that became extinct \~250 Ma.  As a tool,
biostratigraphy is essential in the oil industry for locating and
following possible reservoirs.

## Palaeoclimatology

Although fossils are not (directly) the most often used evidence for
investigating the past climate, which usually falls to isotope analysis,
they provide an important key to corroborating this.  Many fossils
provide the raw materials for finding the isotopes in the first place.

An oyster, 150 Ma, made its shell out of calcite, a mineral of calcium
carbonate.  The calcite was recrystallised from the ions in the sea. 
Therefore, the shell represents the (partial) composition of the sea at
the time the shell formed.  Many things, including temperature and the
size of the ice caps, can affect the sea’s composition, particularly of
isotopes.  So looking at the isotopes in this oyster’s shell can allow
you to infer the climate 150 Ma.

More directly, fossils can show different climatic regions (\~biomes). 
By looking at relations and adaptations of modern equivalents it is
possible to infer that e.g. this species *A*, like the tropical species
*X*, lived in the tropics, thus place Y, where it was found, was
probably tropical.  This works even better when you find the same
species or genus indifferent places — e.g. Hippopotamus fossils have
been found in the Thames.  This is good evidence that the Thames, at one
time, was warmer than it is today — possibly as warm as sub-Saharan
Africa is today\!

## Conclusion

This is only meant to be an introduction into some aspects of
palaeontology that are commonly employed today.  There are many more
parts that can surely be mentioned at some later date; assuming that I
get my act together and start writing regular, eloquently, concisely…  I
hope that you are looking forward to them as much as I am.

