---
title: Where have I been?
date: 2014-09-02
category: writing
tags:
  - Mac
  - Microsoft Word
  - Scrivener
  - tools
  - writing
toc: true
layout: long_post
---
So … hi there. How have things been with you? I’ve been away from this blog for
a while, but don’t worry!: I haven’t been idle … not all of the time anyway.

Much of my time over the past 18 months or so has been focused on one single
piece of work. This hasn’t been the only thing: I’ve appeared in a couple of
talks on phylogeny at SVPCA and Progressive Palaeontology, and by ‘appeared in’
I mean ‘presented’. (I've recently updated my [Academia.edu](https://bristol.academia.edu/BenjaminMoon) with the details of these.) Aside from
those, my mind has been fixed on the taxonomy, I’ve written an overview as one
of my [early blog posts](/posts/my-phd-part1). This has now come together to form
a monster of a manuscript that I’ve just submitted.

However, the fruits of that work aren’t what I’ll be talking about today. By
‘monster of a manuscript’, I mean some 250 pages of body text, plus many for
references, captions, and index: 364 pages in total, and add on the figures and
plates themselves too. (Note the Oxford comma there, which I have a new-found
fondness for. Yes Mike, I realise that this is hypocritical considering the
argument about it that we had last time we met.) This post, therefore, is about
_how_ I wrote this, and _how_ I put it all together, or, more
specifically, the computer programs that I used to do this. It, this post, may
be a bit of a curiosity, but it’s a curiosity that I shall indulge myself in,
much like my eventual post on typography (stay tuned!).

For those who can’t wait, or, potentially rightly, expect me to not write about
this for a long time, you can find many interesting things on the Web.
A [few](http://xkcd.com/1070/) of my favourite places to look are
[Typographica](http://typographica.org), [Typophile](http://www.typophile.com),
and, of course, there is
[Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Typography). Another interesting point
is that I wrote this blog post using the type family [Linux
Libertine](http://www.linuxlibertine.org). Intended to be a superior
replacement for Times New Roman, it succeeds at this very well. It is also
free, includes glyphs for both Greek and Cyrillic, which I have used, and comes
with compatible serifed (Linux Libertine) and sans-serifed (Linux Biolinum),
display, and monospaced fonts.

## Getting the words down

The first challenge is, of course, getting the words down. This assumes that
you know what you’re writing about, and have the ability to do so: while this
is typical for academic writings, it may not be the case in writing fiction
novels, for example. This, in itself, is a very large can of worms, which I may
address some day. Suffice to say: if you are doing a PhD, you’ve probably got
this at least somewhat sorted.

My work consisted of lengthy descriptions of several ichthyosaur taxa: going
through each bone: describing its shape, what it joins to, and what’s around
it. This is simple enough when you have the whole bone in front of you, but
less so when it’s only a bit of it, and you’re having to compare it to a photo
of another fragment that’s housed in a different museum.

However, that’s not where I’m taking this.

<hr />

I dislike [Microsoft Word](http://office.microsoft.com/en-GB/word/). It works,
yes (mostly; ooh! that’s a snide comment right there), but I find it difficult,
and it does not work well with the way that I work. Doubtless there are many
things I could do to improve my relationship with it; I’ve tried. I prefer
[Apple Pages](https://www.apple.com/uk/mac/pages/) as a word processor, but
that is quite a bit more limited in extended functions. This is especially true
for the most recent version. Maybe more features will be added?, but I’m not
sure when or how well. Pages could be great: I found it highly useful for doing
my undergraduate reports, essays, and dissertation. It has lost some of its
sparkle since then. They both suffer, as I’ve realised since starting to write
lengthy, bitty pieces, from being too linear: they excel at starting at the
beginning, going towards the end.

Let me clarify. When writing lengthy descriptions, particularly when each
section is on a specific bone, I found it helpful, and easier to write by
jumping around: a bit here, a bit there, compare that with this, and so on.
This was easily accomplished in the software that I used: [Scrivener
for Mac](http://www.literatureandlatte.com/scrivener.php).

<hr />

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/scrivener.png" alt="Scrivener for Mac" caption="Interface in Scrivener for Mac, showing the Binder on the left, and comments on the right. The writing goes in the middle, here showing two files/sections, separated by the title ‘Scrivener for Mac’. The red colouring shows revisions that I’ve made." %}

Scrivener is a series of programs by Literature and Latte, available for Mac,
and Windows, with an iOS version in development. It is an excellent workhorse
of a writing program, designed for writing substantial works especially, but
also good at ‘lighter bites’, like this post.

What I like, and what I found most helpful in my writing, is that individual
sections, or chapters, can be separated into their own files _ad hoc_ and
_ad libitum_. The project itself, the program’s term for the whole, is
actually a folder, ‘package’ in Mac speak, that contains all of these separate
text files, with the ability to add research files, web pages, and other things
too. Visible in the binder, these files can be opened in any combination by
Scrivener, with side-by-side views, and moved about at will; all controlled,
organised, linked, indexed, and referenced by Scrivener. There are more things
you can do that might be helpful in certain situations too: index cards, and
scriptwriting, among others. As I hinted above: this program is for writers
generally, not specifically for academic writing, but it most certainly does
not suffer from being a Jack-of-all-trades, as Word does.

Being able to separate descriptions as one bone per file allowed me to focus
only on that; useful when some of these descriptions spread to over 1000 words
each. Another important feature is targets, which kept me going with something
to aim for both for the day, and for the whole project. You can even tweet your
progress, should you wish to do so. I didn’t make my original deadline by
a long way.

Of course, writing into this software is no different than any other designed
for the purpose: keyboard, screen, time, will (not all of these are all present
all of the time). However, it is the way in which the program allows you to
work _with_ what you’ve written, both during, and afterwards.

As Scrivener keeps each section in a separate file within the project, getting
it out at the end requires the document to be ‘compiled’ from all the parts.
This post-processing gives control over the look of the output. It might not be
important for a single document that’s going to one place, but sometimes you
might need to reformat it later. In essence, these compile settings act similar
to text styles. They’re applied to both the body text, and to the subdocument
headings, as defined. This latter is very useful for a multilevelled document.
Numerous other features are available: the instructions are 540 pages long, and
made in Scrivener itself.

## Adding authority

Academic work has several hundred years of history behind it that must not be
ignored, but instead must be brought in and included. Referencing the relevant
previous work is just another potential headache, after finding and reading it
in the first place. When this list of references becomes large, say 420 or so
individual publications, help is very much appreciated. (This is the kind of
number that many academics will have do deal with when doing their PhD thesis:
perhaps the largest work in their careers.) I use two programs: [Papers for
Mac](http://www.papersapp.com), to organise and view documents, and [Bookends
for Mac](http://www.sonnysoftware.com/bookends/bookends.html), to collect,
insert, and format references.

<hr />

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/bookends.png" alt="Bookends for Mac" caption="The main database interface in Bookends for Mac." %}

Bookends for Mac by Sonny Software contains the best set of import, export, and
customisation options for references that I’ve found. I’ve looked at
[EndNote](http://endnote.com),
[Sente](http://www.thirdstreetsoftware.com/site/SenteForMac.html), and
[Zotero](https://www.zotero.org), as well as the Citations function of Papers
too. (I used to use Paper’s Citations when I used Pages, and wrote the first
version of the style format for the journal _Palaeontology_ in the [Citation
Style Language](http://citationstyles.org), which is used by Papers, Sente, and
Zotero. All of these allow you to change to format of both citations and the
bibliography: which bits are included and their order, which are italicised or
in bold, and so on. However, as many journals each have their own subtle
differences in citation and reference formatting, it becomes difficult to cover
all of these. (No reference assistant is perfect or complete, and most will
require some tweaking at some stage.) Inevitably, it ends up being the small
bits that are left over and have to be changed later: bibliography formatting
is inevitably a time-consuming task. I’ve found that Bookends gives me those
few more options, which that little less time having to be spent later:
a generally more pleasant way to go.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/bookends-reference.png" alt="Bookends reference window" caption="Reference input window in Bookends for Mac, slightly modified by me from the defaults, again these are only some of the available options." %}

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/bookends-format.png" alt="Bookends formatting window" caption="The formatting window in Bookends for Mac showing some of the available options for inputting and outputting styles." %}

Nicely, citations are easy to add with Bookends: simply import a citekey into
the file from its database. The formatting stage comes later, by using the
program to process the file, taking all the citekeys, formatting the citations,
and adding a bibliography. As it is text based, this means that Bookends can
work with files from many programs: simply export, format, import. There are
also very useful options for showing only the date, or not having brackets
around, for instance. I’ve found that doing my formatting in
[Mellel](http://www.mellel.com), which has particularly close ties to Bookends
(they are available together in a discounted software bundle), adds a bit extra
in formatting control, again saving that little, or more, extra time. While
each of these savings may only a second or two for each edit, in such a long
document, with several hundred or thousands of citations, that easily adds up.

<hr />

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/papers.png" alt="Papers3 for Mac" caption="The main window in Papers for Mac, showing the library at the left, inspector at the right, database at the middle top and viewer at the middle bottom. Like Bookends, the inspector has metadata fields that can be filled manually or automatically. PDF files can be browsed like this, or viewed in full screen." %}

Papers for Mac by Mekentosj, now part of Springer, is a document manager,
primarily for pdfs. Import a pdf file and the software copies it to the
library, and, for research articles, will automatically search for titles,
authors, source, and other reference metadata. The program then lets you search
through the text, view the document, highlight, add notes, and add associated
documents. These are all immensely useful: the bread and butter of an
academic’s daily work. Papers simply takes markup that was done on paper
offprints into digital form. It is not the only such document organiser,
[Preview](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Preview_(Mac_OS)) allows markup, other
software organises files. Yet, being able to view, annotate, and organise
articles, with the associated metadata, search, and citation tools is hugely
useful.

## Finalising for sending off

My workflow usually goes a little like this: write in Scrivener, export as Rich
Text File (.rtf), import into Mellel, format references with Bookends, format
paper as needed (this is usually minimal as Scrivener can generally cover all
the bases), export as .pdf, preferably, or .doc/.docx to distribute. I needed
to add an index, however, and Mellel, unfortunately, doesn’t have this ability.
(It’s one of the things that has been requested in the forums, and this has
been acknowledged by the developers, so it may appear.) For this, I tried
importing into Word, but this struggled with indexing such a large document.

The process itself was simple: create a list of words to index, with how they
should appear, make Word mark these in the document, add the index to the end.
(I followed the instructions from
[Dummies.com](http://www.dummies.com/how-to/content/create-an-index-in-word-2011-for-mac.html).) Word
struggled with this, although wasn’t beaten, but made working with the document
afterwards difficult: pages appeared to be recalculated on-the-fly, so that’s
something else that the program has to do. (I’m not sure whether this is
actually how Word does this, but the constant slowness and crashing suggests
that it was doing a lot of extra work once the index had been added.) It was
too much: Word repeatedly crashed, and became frustratingly slow to use.
I searched for an alternative.

<hr />

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/nisus-writer-pro.png" alt="Nisus Writer Pro" caption="Nisus Writer Pro main window with a text document exported from Scrivener, hence the coloured revisions. The document is viewable as pages, as here, or continuous roll. The expected assortment of tools are present, either as menus, or in a ‘drawer’ at the side of the window (not shown)." %}

I settled on [Nisus Writer Pro for Mac](http://nisus.com/pro/) by Nisus
Software. It has the tools I need and works primarily with .rtf files, how
I mostly pass through my writing. Using the trial showed me how useful Nisus
Writer Pro is. It can do all the things that I need it to do, and quickly.
Processing an index and creating contents does not take long: the compiling
takes some time to go through, but the creating takes only seconds. (The
process to create the index is the same as in Word.) Both of these are also
stored as text to be updated as needed: on demand processing reducing the
general overhead. The styles and formatting options are those typically found
in word processors, but their implementation, their usability, and the way that
they _look_, not an unimportant thing in my world, are more pleasant than many
others. (I am somewhat of an aesthete.) Nisus Writer Pro can, conveniently,
read the change tracking on Word documents, as can Mellel, perhaps the final
part of working with documents. The realisation of this too is, I think, finer
than in Word.

## To finish

Microsoft Word is a powerhouse of a program, both in terms of functions, and
ubiquity. I use it, when necessary. (I have signed up to [Office 365
University](http://office.microsoft.com/en-gb/microsoft-office-365-university-FX102918415.aspx), so get the benefit of the programs
and OneDrive.) Yet I am increasing finding that I do not need to.

I use a MacBook Pro, running OS X. I have seen others complain about Word on OS
X. I have not used Word on Windows. On that platform, it could be excellent and
worth the share that it has garnered. If so, why not also on OS X? I do know
that there are things supported by the Windows version that aren’t found in
Word for Mac, certain advanced typographical options being the one I know
best. These, specifically OpenType feature support, have only recently found
their way into any version of Word. I’ll leave for now the discussion of
[word processing versus typesetting programs](http://www.thebookdesigner.com/2010/01/the-trouble-with-word-processors/). Maybe the next
version will allay my griefs. For the Mac version of Office, the time of this
to appear is nigh.

I do not think that the way I’ve found myself working is bad though. Using several great programs that do what they do well has perhaps served me better than lumbering on with one that I disagree with. My experience has been far from a hardship, even with the program swapping and file manipulation.

I have had occasional problems, but the instructions that come with the
programs are extensive, comprehensive, and useful; not all of those are
guaranteed! Moreover, the forums
( [Scrivener](http://www.literatureandlatte.com/forum/index.php),
[Bookends](https://www.sonnysoftware.com/phpBB3/index.php),
[Papers](http://support.mekentosj.com), [Mellel](http://forum.mellel.com), and
[Nisus](http://nisus.com/forum/)) for each program are very helpful, and I’ve
often been able to contact with the people who make these programs themselves.

Other blogs have talked about their experiences with these programs in their
own projects. (In particular, I occasionally see posts about Scrivener appear
in my [Facebook feed](https://www.facebook.com/pages/Scrivener/126134826351):
I follow them.) I urge you to look them up. Each has a trial option to, so why
not try them. Some are cross-platform, and allow collaboration or working with
documents as such, across many computers.

I don’t think there are many places to find how academics work. My immediate
thought turns to the blog [_Academic workflows on
a Mac_](http://blog.macademic.org) by Aleh Cherp: on this blog, Aleh has
reviews, thoughts, and personal workflows. This is a great place to see how
things can work together to get things done. It may not suit everyone, not
least because of the differences between research topics and methods. I’m
curious whether anyone else has written about this, or what different processes
other people use.
