---
title: From now on
date: 2015-12-17
categories:
  - ichthyosaurs
tags:
  - science
  - taxonomy
  - Jurassic
toc: true
---

## Ichthyosaurs

The great thing is that ichthyosaurs are so awesome: no one feels bad about
spending all their time thinking about them. That's what I've spent my last
four years doing. It will also be what I spend a large part of the next three
years doing.

Certainly that doesn't mean that ichthyosaurs are the only interesting thing
out there: having the joy of being in such a large research group, there are so
many people doing so many different things in palaeontology. I'm looking
forward to the next three years and also the trials and treats they will bring.

## Next

All of that is a prelude to the announcement that that PhD that I started in
2011 is now at its end, in the first instance: there remain only the
corrections and eventual publishing (hopefully) to deal with. And in the
meantime, I've only gone and wrangled myself a job! much to my parents
amusement, surprise, and pleasure.

The joy of not having a PhD is that there is no burdening deadline rapidly
approaching where everything becomes do-or-die; no letters threatening to kick
me off the course should I not submit by such and such a date (ahem); no late
nights worrying about all those things that you could do, haven't done, should
have done, want to do … people say that doing a PhD is one of the most
stressful things you can do in life. Thankfully, I've spoken to various
postdocs who say that finding grant money afterwards is much worse, so I have
that to look forward to.

## Strawberry

But the great thing about doing a postdoc – and, particularly from my point of
view, doing the postdoc that I'm doing – is that what I am doing next is
a continuation and extension: as part of the continuing [JESBI](http://www.brlsi.org/museum-collections/jesbi)
(Jurassic Environment of Strawberry Bank, Ilminster; I don't know whether it
still has that name) project I'll be doing more ichthyosaurs anatomy, adding in
some marine crocodilians, then extending to do function studies with a slew of
numerical, engineering-based techniques; all in the spirit of onwards and
upwards. This is alongside the ~~venerable~~ esteemed coalition of Matt
Williams (Bath Royal Literary and Scientific Institute); Mike Benton, Emily
Rayfield, and Jakob Vinther (Bristol); Matt Friedman and PhD student (Oxford),
and Andrew Ross (National Museum of Scotland).

Rather conveniently, this has been summed up recently be several of the above
in an [article](
href="http://jgs.lyellcollection.org/content/early/2015/06/29/jgs2),
[webpage](https://www.leverhulme.ac.uk/awards-made/awards-focus/exceptional-early-jurassic-fossils-strawberry-bank-somerset),
and was also presented at the Palaeontological Association Annual Meeting
earlier this week. This is simply an introduction and notice of changes – this
post doesn't actually say that much.

The important thing is: watch this space…
