---
author:
- Benjamin C. Moon
- Benjamin C. Moon & Angela M. Kirton
- Benjamin C. Moon
- Benjamin C. Moon
bibliography: Bibliography.bib
csl: /Users/Ben/GitHub/styles/acta-palaeontologica-polonica.csl
lang: en-GB
title: Evolutionary Studies in Ichthyosaurology
---

Ichthyosaurs of the British Middle\
& Upper Jurassic\
& the Evolution of Ichthyosaurs

Benjamin C. Moon


Introduction {#introduction .unnumbered}
============

Ichthyosaurs, members of the clade Ichthyosauriformes [Motani *et al.,*
-@Motani2014a], are perhaps the Mesozoic reptile clade that were most
completely adapted to a marine habitat. During the 160 Ma of existence
of the clade, from the earliest Triassic to the early Late Cretaceous
(248--*c.* 90 Ma), there evolved 107 taxa that are considered valid
([2](#chapter2){reference-type="ref" reference="chapter2"};
[@McGowan2003; @Maisch2010]). The earliest ichthyosaurs show clear
features to an aquatic existence -- viviparity, elongate rostrum and
tail, and paddle-like limbs -- while showing evidence of their
terrestrial and amphibious ancestry [@Motani2014; @Motani2014a]. Through
the evolution of the clade, ichthyosaurs evolved a more highly
streamlined morphology, reduction of the hindlimbs, large orbit, and
crescentic caudal fluke that allowed them to be highly mobile predators,
and a common part of many marine ecosystems throughout the Mesozoic
[@McGowan2003; @Motani2005; @Motani2009; @Maisch2008b; @Marek2015].

The earliest known ichthyosaur material is from the *Procolombites* and
*Subcolombites* ammonite biozones (Olenekian, Lower Triassic) of the
Chaohu area, Anhui Province, China. It includes the ichthyosaur taxa
*Chaohusaurus geishanensis* [Young & Dong, -@Young1972], *Chaohusaurus
chaoxianensis* [Chen, -@Chen1985], and *Cartorhynchus lenticarpus*
[Motani *et al.*, -@Motani2014a] [@Motani2014; @Motani2014a], as well as
the sauropterygian *Majiashanosaurus discocoracoidis* [Jiang *et al.*,
-@Jiang2014], and other indeterminate remains
[@Young1972; @Chen1985; @Jiang2014]. However, the group spread and
diversified rapidly, with several further taxa -- e.g. *Grippia
longirostris* [Wiman, -@Wiman1929], *Gulosaurus helmi* [Cuthbertson *et
al.*, -@Cuthbertson2013a], and *Utatsusaurus hataii* [Shikama *et al.*,
-@Shikama1978] -- known from the Olenekian of Spitsbergen, Canada, and
Japan respectively
[@Wiman1929; @Wiman1933; @Shikama1978; @Brinkman1992; @Cuthbertson2013; @Cuthbertson2013a; @Motani2014].

Through the Triassic, ichthyosaurs increased in diversity and occupation
of niches [@Massare1987; @Massare1990; @Thorne2011; @Frobisch2013], a
trait that was echoed in many other marine reptile groups in the
Middle--Late Triassic [e.g.
@Massare1987; @Neenan2014; @Massare1988; @Diedrich2009]. Several
ichthyosaur clades -- such as the Mixosauridae [Baur, -@Baur1887] and
Shastasauria [Motani, -@Motani1999c] -- developed highly divergent
ecologies: small, circalittoral, with a heterodont crushing dentition in
mixosaurids, while shastasaurians were large to huge, some edentulous,
and inferred ram-feeders
[@Dick2015; @Massare1990; @Massare1987; @Motani2013].

Across the Triassic--Jurassic boundary, following the end-Triassic Mass
Extinction (ETE), there was an apparent loss in disparity and a single
clade -- the Parvipelvia -- accounts for all Jurassic and Cretaceous
ichthyosaur diversity
[@Thorne2011; @Fischer2013a; @Fischer2014c; @Maisch2010]. Despite this,
ichthyosaur diversity remained high, and they are a common component of
many Jurassic and Cretaceous deposits worldwide
[@Bardet2014; @Maisch2000c; @Fischer2014a]. In the Early Jurassic, the
clade Thunnosauria [Motani, -@Motani1999c] evolved, which included the
most highly derived ichthyosaurs. These taxa possessed a highly
streamlined morphology that was adapted to a likely open ocean, pelagic
lifestyle [@Motani2005]. The Early Jurassic lagerstätten in the Lias
Group of the south-western United Kingdom (Hettangian--Pliensbachian),
the Posidonia Shale Formation of south-western Germany (Toarcian), and
others, have produced many thousands of ichthyosaur fossils and other
clades between them [e.g.
@Maisch2000c; @McGowan1974; @McGowan1974a; @McGowan1979], giving an
extraordinarily complete view on the marine ecosystem at these times and
localities. But there are few such insights into subsequent epochs.

Much of the Middle Jurassic has produced few diagnostic ichthyosaur
remains globally [@Maxwell2012b; @Fernandez1994; @Fernandez2007a]. This
paucity of fossils has hampered studies into the evolution of
post-Triassic ichthyosaurs. During this time, the clade
Ophthalmosauridae originated and diversified
[@Fischer2012; @Fischer2013a; @Druckenmiller2014; @Fernandez2007a], but
it is not until the early Callovian Oxford Clay Formation lagerstätte,
and the numerous remains of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley,
-@Seeley1874] -- an already highly derived ophthalmosaurid -- that
diagnostic ichthyosaur remains become more common
[@Andrews1910; @Andrews1913; @Kirton1983]. Both the Oxford Clay and the
Kimmeridgian--Tithonian Kimmeridge Clay formations of north-western
Europe have produced numerous ichthyosaur remains [e.g.
@Huene1922b; @Hulke1871; @Taylor1986; @Sauvage1911]. While many remains
from these strata are isolated or fragmentary, more complete or
three-dimensionally preserved specimens are not uncommon [e.g.
@Andrews1915; @McGowan1997a; @Martill2014; @Fischer2015]. Coeval faunas
are known from Argentina, Russia, Svalbard, and the USA
[@Fernandez2007a; @Zverkov2015; @Roberts2014; @Druckenmiller2012a; @Gilmore1905],
and further non-diagnostic remains have been found in Madagascar and
Antarctica [@Fernandez1997; @Whitham1989].

Ichthyosaur diversity in the Cretaceous was thought to have been
comparatively low, with only the single, cosmopolitan genus
*Platypterygius* [Huene, -@Huene1922b] [@McGowan1972]. However, recent
reappraisal of the extensive material available has found a hidden
diversity prior to the extinction of the Ichthyosauriformes, adding
*Acamptonectes* [Fischer *et al.*, -@Fischer2012], *Malawania* [Fischer
*et al.*, -@Fischer2013a], and *Sisteronia* [Fischer *et al.*,
-@Fischer2014a], among others
[@Fischer2014a; @Zammit2012; @Fischer2013a]. This recent increase in
taxic diversity has not yet been studied in terms of the effect of
relative morphological diversity ([3](#chapter3){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter3"}). However, evidence suggests that the ecology of
post-Triassic -- indeed post-Early--Middle Triassic -- ichthyosaurs was
greatly diminished by competition, or the loss of niches that were not
subsequently recolonised [@Thorne2011; @Dick2015]. The cause of the
extinction of ichthyosaurs in the Cenomanian--Turonian remains
contentious, but this lack of innovation, combined with competition, and
a major ocean anoxic event (OAE), probably played a large part
[@Dick2015; @Thorne2011; @Bardet1992; @Fischer2015].

Despite 200 years of study since the first scientific description of a
recognised ichthyosaur [@Home1814; @Torrens1995], ichthyosaur research
currently faces several active areas of study, and problems to overcome;
perhaps most pressingly:

1.  The definition of several ichthyosaur taxa suffers from historical
    baggage, both from their initial definitions, and subsequent
    emendations of these. Perhaps the best example of this is
    *Ichthyosaurus*, which contains several species, initially defined
    based on teeth characteristics, and more recently on phenetic and
    cladistic characters
    [@DelaBeche1821; @McGowan1974a; @Motani1999c; @Maisch2000c; @Sander2000].
    Reappraisal of such taxa in a modern taxonomic context is necessary.

2.  This couples with cladistic analyses that have, to date, only been
    applied to ichthyosaurs at the generic level, or to subsets of
    ichthyosaur taxa -- e.g. Mixosauridae, Thunnosauria, and
    Ophthalmosauridae
    [@Motani1999c; @Sander2000; @Maisch2000c; @Fischer2013a; @Fischer2014].
    Many taxa have been allied simply by association, such as
    *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* [Hulke, -@Hulke1871], included within
    Ophthalmosauridae as it is from the Upper Jurassic [@Motani1999c].
    This problem applies equally to characters within phylogenetic
    analyses as well as taxa; a complete integration of ichthyosaur
    phylogenetics is needed.

3.  The lack of a complete phylogenetic framework has limited the study
    of large-scale trends across ichthyosaur evolution, particularly
    quantitatively. Qualitative studies have analysed overall trends in
    ichthyosaur body morphology [@McGowan2003; @Motani2005], and
    recently, numerical methods have been applied to explore the
    diversification of ichthyosaur taxa, morphology, and ecology
    [@Thorne2011; @Dick2015; @Fischer2013a]. However, these studies have
    used incomplete datasets, often limited to generic level, that do
    not necessarily capture the full range of ichthyosaur diversity and
    disparity through the Mesozoic.

The aims of this thesis are to approach these problems in
ichthyosaurology, for which there are three questions to be addressed

how many ichthyosaur taxa are present in the British Middle and Upper
Jurassic? how may they be
diagnosed? ([\[chapter1\]](#chapter1){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter1"})

how are all ichthyosaurs interrelated? are these relationships
robust? ([2](#chapter2){reference-type="ref" reference="chapter2"})

what morphological trends do ichthyosaurs exhibit across their
evolution? how does this relate to coeval
occurrences? ([3](#chapter3){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter3"}).

Ichthyosaurs of the British Middle and Upper Jurassic form an important
transitional group between the well known European Lower Jurassic
taxa -- particularly from the Lias Group of southern England, and the
Posidonia Shale Formation of south-western Germany
[@McGowan1974; @McGowan1974a; @McGowan1979; @Maisch2008] -- and the
common and diverse Cretaceous ichthyosaurs
[@Fischer2014b; @Fischer2014a; @McGowan1972; @Fischer2012; @Fischer2013a].
These epochs encompass the origin and diversification of the clade
Ophthalmosauridae, which includes almost all post-Early Jurassic
ichthyosaur taxa [@Fischer2013a], a major portion of total ichthyosaur
diversity
([\[chapter2,chapter3\]](#chapter2,chapter3){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter2,chapter3"}). In this thesis, the taxa present in the
British Middle and Upper Jurassic are diagnosed and re-described
completely based on historical and more recently available material,
with discussion on their relation to coeval faunas. *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* is the most common represented, and perhaps well known,
post-Lower Jurassic ichthyosaur, with numerous remains from the
Callovian Peterborough Member of the Oxford Clay Formation
[@Andrews1910; @Appleby1956; @Appleby1958; @Martill1991a]. However,
other taxa, particularly *Brachypterygius extremus* [Boulenger,
-@Boulenger1904] and *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* from the
Kimmeridgian--Tithonian Kimmeridge Clay Formation, provide an important
link between Ophthalmosauridae and more basal Thunnosauria;
e.g. *Brachypterygius extremus* has been interpreted as one of the
earliest members of the clade Platypterygiinae [@Fischer2013a].
Therefore, the taxonomy and osteology of these ichthyosaurs are integral
to understanding a major shift in ichthyosaur evolution between the
Early Jurassic and Cretaceous.

This new taxonomic data is then integrated into a large study of
ichthyosaur interrelationships using a combined supermatrix and modern
phylogeny analysis technique. This represents the first attempt to
include all ichthyosaur taxa, coded at the species level, in a single
analysis, and unites several previous character sets: the data matrix
contains over 30 000 data points ([2](#chapter2){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter2"}). With this approach, the aim is to resolve the
positions of ichthyosaur taxa, but also identify the areas of
ichthyosaur phylogeny where there is uncertainty, and potential causes
of this. A complete phylogeny is necessary to explore the evolution of
the whole clade ([3](#chapter3){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter3"}), which is studied using both cladistic
morphometric methods, and compared with similar analyses that have used
different datasets or characters [e.g. @Thorne2011; @Dick2015].
Continuous traits of ichthyosaurs are included in a comparative
phylogenetic framework to analyse the rates at which this group evolved
through the Mesozoic.

These results will provide important taxonomic and systematic raw data
that can be included in and compared with further studies. It will also
provide a framework for further large scale studies of both ichthyosaur
evolution, how this relates to and integrates with other Mesozoic marine
reptile clades (e.g. Sauropterygia, Mosasauridae), and the evolution of
and influences on past marine ecosystems.

Author contributions {#author-contributions .unnumbered}
--------------------

This thesis is entirely my own work. is based on the PhD thesis of
A.M.Kirton, who is included as an author by courtesy, but this has only
provided images that have been re-labelled throughout and modified where
required. were researched and written entirely by myself.

Ichthyosaurs of the British Middle & Upper Jurassic Benjamin C. Moon & Angela M. Kirton
=======================================================================================

[\[chapter1\]]{#chapter1 label="chapter1"}

::: {.epigraph}
O horror of horrors! with red glaring eyes, his head and some yards of
his body will rise, and seize you, and shake you, his fangs taste your
gore, while you shriek, and the aid of the ladies implore, and
convulsively grasp at the rocks and the shore; but he's got you ...

Eugene Batchelder\
*A Romance of the Sea-Serpent, or the *Ichthyosaurus**,
[-@Batchelder1850]
:::

cframe=unired 1pt 1ex, minipage=\[t\]0.75, margin=1ex, env=center

[Note to examiners]{.sans-serif}This chapter is entirely my own work. It
is based upon the unpublished PhD thesis of Dr Angela @Kirton1983, but
this contributed only some of the images used. All specimens, and those
recovered more recently, have been visited and examined by BCM. All text
has been written anew based upon personal observation, with reference
and comparison to @Kirton1983. Illustrations by Dr Kirton have been
included, but completely re-labelled and modified based on the present
interpretations. These have been supplemented by illustrations and
photographs by BCM. This work has been submitted to the journal
*Monographs of the Palaeontographical Society,* and incorporates
comments from two reviewers.

[Moon, B. C.]{.smallcaps} & [Kirton, A. M.]{.smallcaps} in press
(2016--2017) Ichthyosaurs of the British Middle and Upper Jurassic \[in
two parts\]. *Monograph of the Palaeontographical Society.*

[ABSTRACT]{.sans-serif}

The ichthyosaur material of the British Middle and Upper Jurassic is
revisited and re-described. Three valid species are present:
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, *Brachypterygius extremus*, and
*Nannopterygius enthekiodon*. *Macropterygius* sp. indet., with
affinities to the Platypterygiinae, formerly referred to *Ichthyosaurus
trigonus*, is noted on the basis of humeral material. *Grendelius
mordax* is synonymised with *Brachypterygius extremus*. *Ophthalmosaurus
monocharactus* is synonymised with *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.
*Ichthyosaurus advena, Ichthyosaurus chalarodeirus,* and *Ichthyosaurus
hygrodeirus* are rejected as *nomina nuda*. *Ichthyosaurus aequalis,
Ichthyosaurus dilatatus, Ichthyosaurus ovalis, Ichthyosaurus
thyreospondylus,* and *Ichthyosaurus trigonus,* are rejected as *nomina
dubia*. The vast majority of remains are from the Oxford Clay and
Kimmeridge Clay formations, but ichthyosaur material is found throughout
the Aalenian--Portlandian interval.

The affinities of *Baptanodon* are considered, and it appears to
represent a species of *Ophthalmosaurus*: *Ophthalmosaurus natans*.
Diagnostic characters are considered important to separate this from
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* at only the species level. The
palaeobiogeographical distribution of Ophthalmosauridae suggests an
early Middle Jurassic origin in the southeastern Pacific Ocean, with a
rapid spread to the Tethys Ocean by the Bathonian.

[RÉSUMÉ]{.sans-serif}

Le matériel d'ichtyosaure du Jurassique moyen et supérieur de la
Grande-Bretagne est réexaminé et décrit de nouveau. Trois espèces
valides sont présentes: *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus, Brachypterygius
extremus* et *Nannopterygius enthekiodon*. *Macropterygius* sp. indet.,
avec des affinités de Platypterygiinae, autrefois dénommé *Ichthyosaurus
trigonus*, est reconnu sur la base du matériel huméral. *Grendelius
mordax* devient synonyme de *Brachypterygius extremus*. *Ophthalmosaurus
monocharactus* devient synonyme d'*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.
*Ichthyosaurus advena, Ichthyosaurus chalarodeirus* et *Ichthyosaurus
hygrodeirus* sont rejetés comme *nomina nuda*. *Ichthyosaurus aequalis,
Ichthyosaurus dilatatus, Ichthyosaurus ovalis, Ichthyosaurus
thyreospondylus,* et *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* sont rejetés comme *nomina
dubia*. La plupart des restes proviennent des formations Oxford Clay et
Kimmeridge Clay, mais on trouve du matériel d'ichtyosaure dans tout
l'intervalle Aalénien--Portlandien.

Les affinités de *Baptanodon* sont envisagées, et il semble représenter
une espèce d'*Ophthalmosaurus*, à savoir *Ophthalmosaurus natans*. Les
caractères diagnostiques sont considérés importants au niveau de
l'espèce seulement pour le séparer d'*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. La
distribution paléogeographique d'Ophthalmosauridae suggère une origine
au début du Jurassique moyen dans le sud-est de l'océan Pacifique, avec
l'extension rapide de l'océan Téthys au Bathonien. \[Translation by Yves
Candela.\]

[ZUSAMMENFASSUNG]{.sans-serif}

Das Material über Ichthyosaurier des britischen Mittel- bis Spätjura
wird hier erneut aufgegriffen und beschrieben. Es gibt drei gültige
Arten: *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus, Brachypterygius extremus,* und
*Nannopterygius enthekiodon*. *Macropterygius* sp. indet., das
Ähnlichkeiten zu den Platypterygiinae aufweist und zuvor *Ichthyosaurus
trigonus* genannt wurde, wird auf Basis von Oberarmknochenmaterial
vermerkt. *Grendelius mordax* wird mit *Brachypterygius extremus*
synonymisiert. *Ophthalmosaurus monocharactus* wird mit *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* synonymisiert. *Ichthyosaurus advena, Ichthyosaurus
chalarodeirus,* und *Ichthyosaurus hygrodeirus* werden als *nomina nuda*
abgelehnt. *Ichthyosaurus aequalis, Ichthyosaurus dilatatus,
Ichthyosaurus ovalis, Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus,* und *Ichthyosaurus
trigonus,* werden als *nomina dubia* abgelehnt. Die große Mehrheit an
Resten stammt aus den Oxford und Kimmeridge Tonerde Formationen, doch
Ichthyosaurier werden in der gesamten Zeitspanne des Aalenium bis
Portlandium gefunden.

Die Ähnlichkeiten bei *Baptanodon* werden berücksichtigt und es scheint,
dass diese eine Art von *Ophthalmosaurus* darstellen: *Ophthalmosaurus
natans*. Bestimmende Eigenschaften werden als wichtig erachtet, diese
Art von *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* ausschließlich auf der Spezies-Ebene
abzugrenzen. Die paläobiogeografische Verteilung der Ophthalmosauridae
lässt eine Herkunft aus dem südöstlichen pazifischen Ozean des frühen
Mitteljuras, gefolgt von einer schnellen Ausbreitung gen Tethysmeer bis
zum Bathonium vermuten. \[Translation by David Schlaphorst.\]

[РЕЗЮМЕ]{.sans-serif}

В этой статьи останки ихтиозавров Британского среднего и верхнего
юрского периода пересматриваются и снова описываются. Появляются три
валидные виды: *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus, Brachypterygius extremus* и
*Nannopterygius enthekiodon*. *Macropterygius* sp. indet. (раньше
названный *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*), что является подобным группе
Platypterygiinae, замечается в связи с плечевым образцом. *Grendelius
mordax* приравнивается к *Brachypterygius extremus*. *Ophthalmosaurus
monocharactus* приравнивается к *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.
*Ichthyosaurus advena, Ichthyosaurus chalarodeirus* и *Ichthyosaurus
hygrodeirus* отвергаются в качестве *nomina nuda*. *Ichthyosaurus
aequalis, Ichthyosaurus dilatatus, Ichthyosaurus ovalis, Ichthyosaurus
thyreospondylus,* и *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* отвергаются в качестве
*nomina dubia*. Большинство останков происходит из формаций глины
Оксфордского и Киммериджского яруса, но останки ихтиозавров находятся по
целому Ааленскому--Портландскому ярусу.

Сходства рода *Baptanodon* рассматриваются и по-видимому является видом
рода *Ophthalmosaurus*: *Ophthalmosaurus natans*. Определяющие
характеристики считаются важными, чтобы различать его от
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* только на уровне вида. Палеобиогеографическое
распределение семейства Ophthalmosauridae указывает на происхождение на
юго-востоке Мирового океана во время раннего среднего юрского периода, с
последующим быстрым распространением на Тетис к Батскому ярусу.
\[Translation by Anastasia Reynolds.\]

Introduction {#intro}
------------

Ichthyosaur specimens are, relatively speaking, not uncommon in the
Middle and Upper Jurassic of the UK. Indeed, in some horizons they may
form the majority of large vertebrate remains found. Despite this, these
later ichthyosaurs have often been sidelined because of the greater
attention paid to the more spectacular Lias Group fossils found so
abundantly along the Dorset and Yorkshire coasts. Continued and repeated
transgressions through the Middle Jurassic (Aalenian--Bathonian;
[@Hallam2001]) covered much of southern England with shallow but
productive seas by the late Middle and early Late Jurassic
(Callovian--Kimmeridgian), which supported a complex food web, with
ichthyosaurs dominating the upper tiers
[@Bradshaw1992; @Martill1994; @Wilkinson2008]. These seas are
represented by the two great clay formations (Oxford Clay and Kimmeridge
Clay formations) that dominate the later part of the Jurassic in
Britain, and extend to north-western Europe. The frequency with which
ichthyosaur fossils have been, and are still, uncovered, and their
occasional completeness, makes these formations important sources of
ichthyosaur remains; the relative scarcity of adequate descriptions
belies this richness and diversity of specimens. The ages of these
ichthyosaur-bearing formations, between the comparatively well-known
ichthyosaurs of the Lower Jurassic and the Lower Cretaceous, makes this
an important transitional episode between the two groups. During this
time, Ophthalmosauridae originated and diversified, leading to the
separation of the subclades Ophthalmosaurinae and Platypterygiinae
[@Fischer2013a]. The palaeogeographical position of the British Isles,
along a seaway that joined the Tethyan and Boreal marine realms, makes
this an important junction between those two disparate ichthyosaur
faunas [@Bradshaw1992].

![Mounted remains of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]
from the Oxford Clay Formation of Peterborough, Cambridgeshire, UK;
presently on display in the main foyer of the Natural History Museum,
London, UK. Composed of three specimens [@Andrews1915]: NHMUK PV R3702,
R3893, and R4124; mounted by Mr L. T. Parsons. Note that the forelimbs
are anteroposteriorly reversed based on the interpretation at the time
(see [\[OicenicusForelimb\]](#OicenicusForelimb){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusForelimb"}). Photograph courtesy Natural History
Museum, London. [\[fig:NHM-Oicenicus-mount\]]{#fig:NHM-Oicenicus-mount
label="fig:NHM-Oicenicus-mount"}](./img/fig-NHM-Ophthalmosaurus-mount.png){#fig:NHM-Oicenicus-mount
width="90%"}

The amount of material, particularly incomplete specimens, has caused
differences in opinions on the taxonomy of these ichthyosaurs [e.g. 
@Lydekker1888; @Huene1922b; @McGowan1976]. Middle and Upper Jurassic
ichthyosaurs suffer especially from the number of taxa based upon single
and short series of vertebral centra [@Owen1840; @Phillips1871], which
essentially do not change form between the Lower Jurassic and
Cretaceous. This monograph aims to resolve the taxonomy and affinities
of British Middle and Upper Jurassic ichthyosaurs by reappraising and
re-describing the available material within a modern, systematic
framework. It is based upon the unpublished, although ubiquitous, Ph.D.
thesis of Dr Angela @Kirton1983, who has graciously passed on her text
and illustrations. However, all the material has been re-examined by BCM
and full descriptions written anew, which form the main part of this
monograph. With the most available material, *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
[Seeley, -@Seeley1874]
([1.1](#fig:NHM-Oicenicus-mount){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:NHM-Oicenicus-mount"}) is described first in detail
([\[Oicenicus\]](#Oicenicus){reference-type="ref"
reference="Oicenicus"}). *Brachypterygius extremus* [Boulenger,
-@Boulenger1904] ([\[Bextremus\]](#Bextremus){reference-type="ref"
reference="Bextremus"}), *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* [Hulke,
-@Hulke1871] ([\[Nenthekiodon\]](#Nenthekiodon){reference-type="ref"
reference="Nenthekiodon"}), and *Macropterygius*
sp. ([1.5.1.6](#Macropterygiusspindet){reference-type="ref"
reference="Macropterygiusspindet"}) are also described more briefly
([1.5.1](#tax:taxavalida){reference-type="ref"
reference="tax:taxavalida"}), and these four species are compared to
other ichthyosaur taxa with a focus on recently identified phylogenetic
characters ([1.6](#OsteologicalComparisons){reference-type="ref"
reference="OsteologicalComparisons"}). Invalid British Middle and Upper
Jurassic taxa are listed with discussion
([1.5.2](#Taxainvalida){reference-type="ref" reference="Taxainvalida"}).
Brief discussion is made on the variation and taxonomic relations of
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon,OicenicusKimmClay\]](#synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon,OicenicusKimmClay){reference-type="ref"
reference="synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon,OicenicusKimmClay"}), and
the palaeobiogeography of Middle and Upper Jurassic ichthyosaurs
([\[tax:palaeobiogeography\]](#tax:palaeobiogeography){reference-type="ref"
reference="tax:palaeobiogeography"}).

### Acknowledgements {#acknow}

BCM would like to thank the following people for their help and
discussion during the preparation of this monograph: I. Gladstone,
D. Hutchinson, and R. Vaughan (BRSMG); M.J. Benton, D.J. Button,
A. Caromel, E.J. Rayfield, R. Schouten, T. Stubbs, and P. Viegas
(BRSUG); S. Finney and M. Riley (CAMSM); N. Clark, J.K. Ingham, and
J. Stewart (GLAHM); M. Evans (LEICT); P. Barrett and S. Chapman (NHMUK);
A. Longworth (PETMG); P. Jeffrey (OUMNH); D.M. Martill, University of
Portsmouth; D. Naish, A. Roberts, and J. Wujek-Lawrence (SOTUG);
A. Kreisheh and D. Parsons (WESTM); and S. Etches. My thanks to
Y. Candela, A. Reynolds, and D. Schlaphorst for providing abstract
translations, and support from members of the Radsphere. Also, to
Y. Candela and E.M. Maxwell, whose reviews greatly improved the
manuscript. This research was supported by funding from the University
of Bristol Bob Savage Memorial Fund, Geological Society of London Daniel
Pidgeon Fund, Palaeontographical Society Research Grant, and Systematics
Association Systematics Research Fund. I would like to hugely thank my
parents for their support in my Ph.D. research.

From her original research, AMK thanks, for access to specimens and
discussion, C.L. Forbes (CAMSM); J.G. Martin (LEICT); R.M.C. Eager,
Manchester Museum, Manchester; A.C. Milner, R. Croucher, and the
Trustees (NHMUK); J.K. Ingham and W.D.I. Wolfe (GLAHM); S.R. Howe,
National Museum of Wales, Cardiff; H.P. Powell (OUMNH); P.R. Crowther
(PETMG); R. Dickinson, Swindon Museum, Swindon; R.M. Appleby,
R. Johnson, C. McGowan, J.B. Delair, and J.-M. Mazin. Further thanks are
given to Castle Museum, Norwich, Norfolk; Kendal Museum, Kendal,
Cumbria; Yorkshire Museum, York, Yorkshire; Dorset County Museum,
Dorchester, Dorset; The Shoe Museum, C.J. Clark Ltd., Street, Somerset;
Bath Museum, Bath, Somerset, and Hull Museum, Hull, Yorkshire. At the
University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Northumberland, I thank J.S. Shaw and
G. Howson, and S. Banks for typing of the manuscript. Finally, I thank
A.L. Panchen who suggested the project and gave me support and guidance
throughout. Financial support for this research was provided by a
postgraduate studentship from the National Environmental Research
Council.

### Abbreviations {#abbrev}

ansp, Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA;
BRSMG, Bristol City Museum and Art Gallery, Bristol, UK; BRSUG, School
of Earth Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK; BUCCM,
Buckinghamshire County Museum, Aylesbury, UK; CAMSM, Sedgwick Museum of
Earth Sciences, Cambridge, UK; CMNH, Carnegie Museum of Natural History,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; CRYNH, Croydon Natural History &
Scientific Society, Croydon, UK; DORCM, Dorset County Museum,
Dorchester, UK; GLAHM, Hunterian Museum, University of Glasgow, Glasgow,
UK; GPIT, Institut und Museum für Geologie und Paläontologie der
Universität, Tübingen, Germany; LEICT, New Walk Museum, Leicester, UK;
NEWHM, Great North Museum: Hancock, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK; NHMUK,
Natural History Museum, London, UK; PIMUZ, Paläontologisches Institut
und Museum der Universität Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland; OUMNH,
University Museum of Natural History, Oxford, UK; PETMG, City Museum and
Gallery, Peterborough, UK; SESNE, Société d'Étude des Sciences
Naturelles d'Elbeuf; SM, Schwegler Museum, Langenaltheim, Germany; SMNS,
Staatliches Museum für Naturkunde, Stuttgart, Germany; SOTUG, University
of Southampton Geology Collections, University of Southampton,
Southampton, UK; WESTM, Weston-super-Mare Museum, Weston-super-Mare, UK.

History of Research {#history}
-------------------

Although the first ichthyosaur remains to be recognised as belonging to
a separate, extinct group were not found until 1811 by Joseph and Mary
Anning [@Torrens1995], ichthyosaur fossils had been found and published
beforehand. Perhaps the earliest representations were by @Lhwyd1699 [pp
78, 83, pls 17--19 *pars*], which show a proximal scapula and humerus,
identified as *Solearia*, and several vertebrae, identified as
*Ichthyospondyli*. Home's
[-@Home1814; -@Home1816; -@Home1818; -@Home1819a; -@Home1819; -@Home1820]
descriptions of what is now *Temnodontosaurus platyodon* [Conybeare,
-@Conybeare1822] allowed for these isolated and disparate specimens to
be correctly identified, but up to then all British ichthyosaurian
remains had come from the Lower Jurassic Lias Group of Dorset. Materials
from the Middle and Upper Jurassic were noted by @DelaBeche1821
[p. 580], primarily from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation at Kimmeridge,
Dorset, and Shotover, Oxfordshire, but these were too fragmentary to be
described [@Conybeare1822]. @Owen1840 [p. 124] described and named the
first Upper Jurassic specimens, erecting *Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus*
[Owen, -@Owen1840] and *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* [Owen, -@Owen1840] on
the basis of vertebrae from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation (see
[\[Ithyreospondylus,Itrigonus\]](#Ithyreospondylus,Itrigonus){reference-type="ref"
reference="Ithyreospondylus,Itrigonus"}).

@Seeley1869 catalogued specimens in the Woodwardian (now Sedgwick)
Museum, Cambridge, including several specimens from the Middle and Upper
Jurassic. Again, much of this comprised isolated remains, but several
specimens were assigned by Seeley to new taxa: *Ichthyosaurus
chalarodeirus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1869], *Ichthyosaurus hygrodeirus*
[Seeley, -@Seeley1869], and *Ichthyosaurus megalodeirus* [Seeley,
-@Seeley1869] (see
[\[Ichalarodeirus,Ihygrodeirus,Imegalodeirus\]](#Ichalarodeirus,Ihygrodeirus,Imegalodeirus){reference-type="ref"
reference="Ichalarodeirus,Ihygrodeirus,Imegalodeirus"}). Specimens
collected by Mr J. C. Mansel-Pleydell from the Kimmeridge Clay of
Kimmeridge Bay were described by @Hulke1870 [@Hulke1871; @Hulke1872],
and these included the holotype of *Ichthyosaurus enthekiodon* [Hulke,
-@Hulke1871]. Phillips' [-@Phillips1871] account of the geology of
Oxfordshire includes reference to several ichthyosaurian specimens from
the Middle Jurassic Stonesfield Slate (= Stonesfield Member; see
[1.3.1](#StonesfieldMember){reference-type="ref"
reference="StonesfieldMember"}), Middle--Upper Jurassic Oxford Clay
(including those collected by Mr Charles Leeds), and Upper Jurassic
Kimmeridge Clay formations, and he erected several taxa (see
[1.3.1](#StonesfieldMember){reference-type="ref"
reference="StonesfieldMember"}). @Lydekker1888 reviewed many of these
taxa, and found most to be uncertain and based upon incomplete remains.
Despite completing several monographs of Mesozoic reptiles [e.g.
@Owen1869; @Owen1881], Owen did not cover the ichthyosaurs of the Middle
and Upper Jurassic, aside from a brief mention of Middle Jurassic
remains of *Ichthyosaurus brachyspondylus* [Owen, -@Owen1881] from
Russia [@Owen1881 127], and figuring vertebrae from the Kimmeridge Clay
Formation ( NHMUK 46473e, see
[\[NenthekiodonMaterial\]](#NenthekiodonMaterial){reference-type="ref"
reference="NenthekiodonMaterial"}; [@Owen1881 pl. 22; *fide*
@Lydekker1889 pp. 33--34]). @Lydekker1889 catalogued specimens in the
then British Museum (Natural History), including several he referred to
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and *Ichthyosaurus enthekiodon*. He later
added to this, and further named *Ophthalmosaurus pleydelli* [Lydekker,
-@Lydekker1890] from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation of Dorset (see
[\[Opleydelli\]](#Opleydelli){reference-type="ref"
reference="Opleydelli"}); @Mansel-Pleydell1890 described this specimen
more fully.

From 1867, Mr Charles E. Leeds, later joined, and then succeeded, by his
brother, Mr Alfred N. Leeds, began collecting from the brick pits in the
Oxford Clay Formation around Peterborough. These proved to be prolific
in vertebrate remains, ichthyosaurs being particularly common.
Examination of the collection by @Seeley1874 led to the identification
of a new genus and species of ichthyosaur, *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*,
distinguished on the form of its pectoral girdle and forelimb. The
efforts of the Leeds brothers in collecting material led @Woodward1890
[p. xv] to call the collection "unrivalled". Acquaintance with Dr Henry
Woodward, then Keeper of Geology at the then British Museum (Natural
History), led to the sale of the 'first' Leeds Collection to the museum
between 1890 and 1893 [@Leeds1956]; several subsequent purchases were
made up to 1920. Other parts of the collection have been distributed to
GLAHM, GPIT, LEICT and PETMG, among others. The collection includes
around 50 species of vertebrates, as well as arthropods, molluscs, and
brachiopods. @Andrews1910 [@Andrews1913] completed an extended
description of the marine reptiles from this collection
(ichthyosaurians, crocodilians, and plesiosaurians), identifying one
ichthyosaur taxon: *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. This species later became
one of the prize display specimens in the NHMUK [@Andrews1915], and is
still found in the main entrance foyer
([1.1](#fig:NHM-Oicenicus-mount){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:NHM-Oicenicus-mount"}). The Leeds Collection was an
important resource in the revision of the stratigraphy of the Oxford
Clay Formation [@Cox1992]. This, along with further excavations, formed
the basis of Martill's [-@Martill1985; -@Martill1986; -@Martill1987]
stratigraphic and taphonomic study of vertebrates from the Peterborough
Member. He identified a particular concentration of vertebrate material
in this member, relative to the two above, and that more articulated
remains are largely found in two specific beds (see
[1.3.3](#OxfordClay){reference-type="ref" reference="OxfordClay"}).

Following the description of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, and the
discovery of *Baptanodon* [Marsh, -@Marsh1880b] (= *Sauranodon* [Marsh,
-@Marsh1879]) in the Upper Jurassic of the USA
[@Marsh1880a; @Marsh1880b], debate over the taxonomic status of these
two genera has continued (see
[\[synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon\]](#synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon){reference-type="ref"
reference="synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon"}). @Bauer1898 completed a
study of ichthyosaurs in the upper Weißer Jura (approximately Upper
Jurassic) and equivalent beds of Europe. Here he provided extensive
descriptions of remains referred to *Ichthyosaurus posthumus* [Wagner,
-@Wagner1852], but, in taxonomic review, considered most Upper Jurassic
ichthyosaur taxa (including *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, but excluding
*Ichthyosaurus enthekiodon*) to be junior synonyms of *Ichthyosaurus
trigonus*
([\[Ithyreospondylus,Itrigonus\]](#Ithyreospondylus,Itrigonus){reference-type="ref"
reference="Ithyreospondylus,Itrigonus"}). A new specimen, later decided
to be from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation, allowed @Boulenger1904 to
erect the new species *Ichthyosaurus extremus* [Boulenger,
-@Boulenger1904], which, like *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, and various
species of *Ichthyosaurus* [König, -@Konig1818], was based upon the
structure of the forelimb.

For much of the first half of the Twentieth Century, British ichthyosaur
palaeontology was somewhat in the doldrums, particularly as regards work
on materials from the Middle and Upper Jurassic. Important contributions
were made by @Huene1916 [@Huene1922b; @Huene1931b], mostly on the
taxonomy and relations of Liassic ichthyosaurs, although he did complete
a generic revision of *Ichthyosaurus enthekiodon* and *Ichthyosaurus
extremus* to *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* and *Brachypterygius extremus*
respectively [@Huene1922b pp 97--98]. *Ophthalmosaurus* [Seeley,
-@Seeley1874] was revisited by @Appleby1956 [@Appleby1958], who
re-described portions of the material and catalogued collections derived
from the Leeds' Oxford Clay collection. In particular, @Appleby1956
discussed the variation found in specimens referred to
*Ophthalmosaurus*, finding, like @Andrews1910, that there was a
continuous range. Appleby did, however, consider the notches on the
coracoid to be taxonomically important, and divided *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* into two species: *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and
*Ophthalmosaurus monocharactus* [Appleby, -@Appleby1956] (see
[\[OicenicusDiscussion,Omonocharactus\]](#OicenicusDiscussion,Omonocharactus){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusDiscussion,Omonocharactus"}). @Delair1959 reviewed
the ichthyosaurian remains found in Dorset, including the material
evidence for each taxon; like those before, he found many taxa were
based on insubstantial vertebral remains.

Towards the end of the Twentieth Century, the pace of ichthyosaur
research increased. This included the use of new quantitative and
phenetic techniques used in both taxonomy and systematics
[@McGowan1974; @McGowan1974a; @McGowan1976; @Johnson1977; @Johnson1979].
@McGowan1976 again reprised the taxonomy of Middle and Upper Jurassic
ichthyosaurs, finding many to be *nomina dubia* or *nomina nuda*.
@Kirton1983 completed a thorough redescription of Oxford Clay and
Kimmeridge Clay ichthyosaurs, which has served for many years as the
master description, despite remaining unpublished, and she recognised
four valid taxa: *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, *Nannopterygius
enthekiodon*, *Brachypterygius extremus*, and *Grendelius mordax*
[McGowan, -@McGowan1976]. @Delair1985 figured poorly known specimens,
including a possible counterpart to the holotype of *Brachypterygius
extremus* (WESTM 1978.219), and CRYNH 209, an ophthalmosaurid from the
Middle Jurassic Cornbrash Formation.

The most recent work to include Middle and Upper Jurassic ichthyosaurs
has focussed on placing them in a phylogenetic context. Three
whole-group generic-level phylogenies
[@Motani1999c; @Maisch2000c; @Sander2000], following from previous
smaller analyses [@Mazin1982; @Caldwell1996], found a monophyletic
Ophthalmosauridae within the Parvipelvia that includes all post-Early
Jurassic ichthyosaur taxa. As new discoveries have been made, these
phylogenies have been extended and re-run, with a special focus on these
two clades [e.g. @Fernandez2007; @Fischer2014; @Fischer2014b].

Worldwide, ichthyosaur remains from this time are most common from the
Upper Jurassic, although diagnostic specimens are known from the Middle
Jurassic also. In the Aalenian, this is limited to *Stenopterygius
aaleniensis* [Maxwell *et al.*, -@Maxwell2012b] from south-western
Germany. @Valenciennes1861 [@Valenciennes1861a] presented two specimens,
possibly pertaining to the same individual, from the Kimmeridge Clay
Formation of northern France, naming these *Ichthyosaurus cuvieri*
[Valenciennes, -@Valenciennes1861] and *Ichthyosaurus normanniae*
[Valenciennes, -@Valenciennes1861a] respectively. Further remains from
the Tithonian of northern France were described by @Sauvage1888
[@Sauvage1902; @Sauvage1902b; @Sauvage1902c; @Sauvage1902a]. He
recognised five species of ichthyosaur [@Sauvage1902c]: *Ichthyosaurus
thyreospondylus, Ichthyosaurus trigonus, Nannopterygius enthekiodon,*
and *Ophthalmosaurus cuvieri* [Valenciennes, @Valenciennes1861] based
mostly on vertebral and limb material, although he also described skull
material [@Sauvage1902a]. @Sauvage1911 described further material
referred to *Nannopterygius enthekiodon, Ophthalmosaurus cuvieri,* and
*Ichthyosaurus trigonus,* including limb material that @Huene1922b later
used to erect the genus *Macropterygius*. This latter material is
similar to that from the Kimmeridge Clay of the UK described below (see
[1.5.1.6](#Macropterygiusspindet){reference-type="ref"
reference="Macropterygiusspindet"}). More recently, disarticulated
remains from the Tithonian of Boulogne, France, were described and
referred to *Ophthalmosaurus* sp. [@Bardet1997]. While referral to
species level is not possible based on the material available, this
material provides evidence for the presence of *Ophthalmosaurus* in the
Tithonian of northern France (see also
[\[OicenicusKimmClay\]](#OicenicusKimmClay){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusKimmClay"}).

@Wagner1852 [@Wagner1853; @Jager1856; @Meyer1864] described remains,
including the ichthyosaurian *Ichthyosaurus leptospondylus* [Wagner,
-@Wagner1853], from the lithographic limestones (Solnhofen Formation,
Kimmeridgian--Tithonian) of Bavaria, southern Germany. @Bardet2000
revisited these, re-assigning them to *Aegirosaurus leptospondylus*
[Wagner, -@Wagner1853]. Fragmentary ichthyosaur remains were reported
from the Upper Jurassic--Lower Cretaceous sequence of west coast USA by
@Camp1942 [@Camp1966]. @Rusconi1938
[@Rusconi1940; @Rusconi1942; @Rusconi1948] described Middle and Upper
Jurassic ichthyosaur remains from Mendoza, Argentina, that are
strikingly similar to those from both the UK and the USA. The Neuquén
Basin has proven productive for ichthyosaur fossils. Five ichthyosaur
taxa are known from this locality: *Chacaicosaurus cayi* [Fernández,
-@Fernandez1994], *Caypullisaurus bonapartei* [Fernández,
-@Fernandez1997a], *Mollesaurus periallus* [Fernández, -@Fernandez1999],
*'Ophthalmosaurus monocharactus'*, and *Arthropterygius* sp.
[@Gasparini1988; @Gasparini2007; @Fernandez2012]. *Arthropterygius*
[Maxwell, -@Maxwell2010] has also been found in the Late Jurassic of
northern Canada [@Russell1993; @Maxwell2010]. Ophthalmosaurids have been
found in the Oxfordian of Mexico and Cuba also
[@Fernandez2000; @Buchy2009; @Buchy2010]. @Fernandez1997 referred a
basioccipital from the Portlandian of Madagascar to *Brachypterygius*
sp., which was later assigned to *Brachypterygius extremus* by
@McGowan2003 (see
[\[BextremusMaterial\]](#BextremusMaterial){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusMaterial"}), and a partial distal limb to
Ichthyosauria *incertae sedis*. The similarity between the above
mentioned taxa and worldwide specimens suggest that the connected
proto-Atlantic and peri-Tethyan regions experienced strong interchange
of ichthyosaur taxa throughout the Middle to Late Jurassic.

Further Upper Jurassic--Lower Cretaceous (Volgian = upper
Kimmeridgian--lower Berriasian) ichthyosaurs have been described from
Saratov and Volga Oblasts, Russia. Plesiosaur and ichthyosaur remains
were mentioned by @Zhuravlev1941 [@Zhuravlev1943]. More complete
specimens have since been described briefly, and several taxa erected
[@Storrs2000], for example, *'Ophthalmosaurus undorensis'* [Efimov,
-@Efimov1991], *'Brachypterygius zhuravlevi'* [Arkhangelsky,
-@Arkhangelsky1998], and *Undorosaurus gorodischensis* [Efimov,
-@Efimov1999a]. The similarity between the above mentioned taxa and
worldwide specimens suggest that the connected proto-Atlantic and
peri-Tethyan regions experienced strong interchange of ichthyosaur taxa
throughout the Middle to Late Jurassic. Recent excavations in the Upper
Jurassic--Lower Cretaceous of Spitsbergen, Norway, have uncovered
several new marine reptile taxa, with ichthyosaurs being the most common
representatives [@Angst2010; @Druckenmiller2012a]. While these are all
Ophthalmosauridae, there is little taxonomic overlap with those from the
UK or worldwide. Although a seaway seems to have been present between
the Tethys/proto-Atlantic and Boreal oceans at this time, as evidenced
by the influx of Boreal ammonite faunas [@Hudson1994], there is little
evidence for interchange between these two ichthyosaur faunas.

Stratigraphy
------------

The Jurassic System in the British Isles is complex and variable,
reflecting diverse and rapidly changing palaeoenvironments. A full
account is beyond the scope of this monograph, so only those horizons
that have produced notable ichthyosaur remains are discussed below
([\[fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities,fig:MUJ-stratigraphy\]](#fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities,fig:MUJ-stratigraphy){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities,fig:MUJ-stratigraphy"}).

![Map of major Middle and Upper Jurassic rock outcrop in the UK, with
important ichthyosaur-producing localities indicated. Scale bar
represents 100 km.
[\[fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities\]]{#fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities
label="fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities"}](./img/fig-MUJ-outcrop-localities.pdf){#fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities
width="60%"}

Much of the Middle Jurassic (i.e. Aalenian--Bathonian) has produced few
ichthyosaur remains, or marine reptiles more generally. Indeed,
worldwide diagnostic ichthyosaur finds from this time are limited to
only four taxa: *Mollesaurus periallus, Stenopterygius aaleniensis,
Chacaicosaurus cayi,* and *'Stenopterygius grandis'* [Cabrera,
-@Cabrera1939]. Diagnostic specimens are rare; these taxa are
represented by few complete fossils [@Maxwell2012b; @Fernandez2014].
British ichthyosaur remains from the Aalenian--Bathonian are poorly
known. Fragmentary remains referred to *Ichthyosaurus* have been
reported from the Inferior Oolite (Aalenian--Bajocian) of Dorset and
Gloucestershire, with possible further material from North Yorkshire
[@Benton1995]. Isolated vertebrae have been described from the
Stonesfield Member of the Taynton Limestone Formation (= Stonesfield
Slate, middle Bathonian: [@Phillips1871; @Boneham1993; @Benton1995]). A
partial forelimb (humerus, radius, and ulna: CRYNH 209) of an
ophthalmosaurid ichthyosaur has been found in the Cornbrash Formation
(Bathonian) of Yetminster, Dorset [@Delair1985]. It is not until the
Callovian, with the exceptional abundance of fossils from the Oxford
Clay Formation, that ichthyosaur remains become more abundant and
complete.

![image](./img/fig-MUJ-Stratigraphy.pdf){width="19cm"}

### Stonesfield Member {#StonesfieldMember}

The Stonesfield Member (Taynton Limestone Formation, Bathonian, Middle
Jurassic: [@Boneham1993]) of Oxfordshire is one of the few Middle
Jurassic horizons that have produced ichthyosaurian remains, but these
are limited to a few non-diagnostic vertebral remains. @Phillips1871
mentioned a vertebral centrum (OUMNH J12001) from the Stonesfield Slate
and erected *Ichthyosaurus advena* [Phillips, -@Phillips1871] for this
(see [\[Iadvena\]](#Iadvena){reference-type="ref" reference="Iadvena"}).
This horizon is a sand-enveloped laminated calcareous grit with oolites
and shells [@Boneham1993] interpreted as a result of clastic deposition
during a transgressive event. The palaeoenvironment was offshore shallow
marine, but with a large terrestrial input, and possible influx and
rapid deposition during storm events [@Benton1995].

### Cornbrash Formation {#Cornbrash}

The Cornbrash Formation straddles the boundary between the Bathonian and
Callovian. It is bounded by the Forest Marble, Blisworth Clay or Scalby
formations below, and the Kellaways Formation above, extending for up to
10.5 m thick [@Cope1980; @Page1989]. The limestones of the Cornbrash
Formation mark a staged marine transgression, transitioning from
nearshore to offshore deposits [@Arkell1933; @Bradshaw1992]. Vertebrate
remains have been recorded, such as dinosaurs and marine crocodilians,
but most of these are poorly preserved [@Weishampel2005]. One
ichthyosaur specimen: CRYNH 209, from the Cornbrash of Yetminster is
known, representing one of the earliest ophthalmosaurid remains in
Europe.

### Oxford Clay Formation {#OxfordClay}

The Oxford Clay Formation spans much of the Callovian (Peterborough and
Stewartby members) and the lower part of the Oxfordian (Weymouth
Member). It was originally named by Buckland [in @Phillips1818] and
redefined as the Oxford Clay Formation by @Cox1992. The Oxford Clay
Formation outcrops in a north-easterly to south-westerly directed arc
across southern and north-eastern England, with well-known localities at
Weymouth, Dorset; Oxford, Oxfordshire; and Peterborough, Cambridgeshire,
but outcrops extend between Dorset and Yorkshire
([1.2](#fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities"}; [@Wright2001; @Cox2002]).
Further outcrop is found in the Inner Hebridean islands of Skye, Eigg,
and Scalpay [@Turner1966]. It is divided into the Peterborough (= Lower
Oxford Clay), Stewartby (= Middle Oxford Clay), and Weymouth (= Upper
Oxford Clay) members, with a total thickness of up to 185 m [@Cox1992].

#### Peterborough Member {#PeterboroughMember}

The Peterborough Member is 16.8 m thick at its type section, King's
Dyke, near Whittlesey, Cambridgeshire [ TL 248967: @Hudson1994], but may
be up to 65 m thick [@Cox1992]. It is bounded by the sandy Kellaways
Formation below, with which it interbeds, also the base of the Oxford
Clay Formation, and the Stewartby Member above. The lithology is largely
organic-rich (bituminous), fissile shales, interspersed with laterally
discontinuous bivalve-dominated shell beds (e.g. *Gryphaea* [Lamarck,
-@Lamarck1801], *Grammatodon* [Meek & Hayden, -@Meek1860], and
*Meleagrinella* [Whitfield, -@Whitfield1885]) and sands; @Hudson1994,
after @Calloman1968, separated 55 numbered beds. Its high organic
content [over 9%: @MacQuaker1994] allowed more efficient 'self-firing'
bricks to be made [Fletton process:
@MonopoliesandMergersCommission1976], and led to extensive workings by
the London Brick Company in the area around Peterborough,
Cambridgeshire. The Peterborough Member spans four ammonite biozones
that extend from the uppermost Lower Callovian to the lowermost Upper
Callovian
([\[fig:MUJ-stratigraphy\]](#fig:MUJ-stratigraphy){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MUJ-stratigraphy"}; [@Martill1991]).

#### Stewartby and Weymouth members {#StewarbyWeymouthmembers}

The Stewartby and Weymouth members are lithologically similar and
largely distinguished by their faunal compositions [@Martill1986]. The
base of the Stewartby Member is the top of the highest organic-rich
mudstone of the Peterborough Member, and it extends up to 50 m to its
upper boundary with the Weymouth Member at the top of the Lamberti
Limestone [@Cox1992]. The type section is located at the London Brick
Company's Rookery Pit, Stewartby, Bedfordshire ( TL 015409;
[@Cox1992; @Berridge1998]). This member spans much of the Upper
Callovian [@Martill1991].

The Weymouth Member is the uppermost member of the Oxford Clay
Formation. It is bounded by the top of the Stewartby Member below and it
coarsens up into the silty mudstones or siltstones of the West Walton
Formation above [@Cox1992]. This member can be up to 70 m thick. The
type sections are located at Ham and Furzy or Jordan cliffs, Weymouth,
Dorset (SY 697816). The Weymouth Member spans the Lower Oxfordian
[@Martill1991].

Both the Stewartby and Weymouth members are more calcareous than the
underlying Peterborough Member, comprising blocky and poorly
fossiliferous mudstones with a lower organic content and thin calcareous
siltstones. The Stewartby Member is more variably silty than the
Weymouth Member [@Cox1992].

#### Vertebrate fossils {#OxfordClayVertebrates}

Vertebrate fossils are most common in the Peterborough Member and are
particularly associated with the '*Gryphaea* and Reptile beds' (beds
1--13, 1.2 m), which comprise the lowest part of the Oxford Clay
Formation [@Martill1986; @Hudson1994]. This horizon was well exposed by
the clay mining in the Peterborough area, and is the source of much of
the material in the Leeds Collection [@Andrews1910; @Leeds1956]. The
nature of the lithology allows the material to be completely removed
from the matrix so that specimens can be viewed completely exposed and
in three dimensions [@Martill1986]. Shallow burial also means that many
of the remains have suffered little or no crushing, and so many
specimens retain their original, three-dimensional forms [@Hudson1978].
Beds 8 and 10 are notable for producing articulated ichthyosaur remains
[@Martill1986; @Hudson1994]. More generally, marine reptile remains
include the plesiosaurians: *Cryptoclidus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1892],
*Liopleurodon* [Sauvage, -@Sauvage1873], *Marmornectes* [Ketchum &
Benson, -@Ketchum2011], *Muraenosaurus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874a]; the
thalattosuchians: *Metriorhynchus* [Meyer, -@Meyer1830], *Steneosaurus*
[Geoffrey, -@Geoffrey1825], and *Tyrannoneustes* [-@Young2013 Young et
al.,]; and the ichthyosaurian *Ophthalmosaurus*, among others
[@Leeds1956; @Martill1986; @Martill1991]. Dinosaurs including the
theropod *Eustreptospondylus* [Walker, -@Walker1964] are also known
[@Weishampel2005; @Sadleir2008]. Partially and fully disarticulated
ichthyosaur specimens can be found higher in the Peterborough Member
(e.g.  BUCCM 1983/1008: [@Martill1986; @Martill1987]).

#### Interpretation {#OxfordClayInterpretation}

The Oxford Clay Formation is interpreted as the result of a
transgressive sequence, continuing from the uppermost Bathonian through
the Callovian, and forming a shallow epeiric sea in which deep water
dysoxic mudstones were deposited across much of Central and East England
[@Hudson1991; @Bradshaw1992]. Below, the Kellaways Sand Formation
interfingers with the Peterborough Member in its lower parts. As the
Peterborough Member is comparatively organic-rich, and there is
relatively little disturbance of the sediment by benthic organisms, it
is likely to have been low in oxygen and with a substrate that was
unstable or had a high water content [@Hudson1991]. This 'soupy
substrate' may have allowed for the prolific and complete preservation
seen in this horizon [@Martill1987; @Martill1993]. The environment was
probably nearshore, based on an apparent influx of terrestrial organic
matter and the relative frequency of terrestrial dinosaur remains.
Further deepening through the Callovian and into the Oxfordian placed
the Stewartby and Weymouth members farther offshore, so reducing the
supply of organic material.

### Corallian Group {#Corallian}

The Corallian Group is a complex and highly variable sequence of
limestones and sandstones that represent a series of repeated
regressions from offshore or nearshore to shore deposits. It is bounded
by the Oxford Clay Formation below and the Kimmeridge Clay Formation
above, is about 100 m thick, and spans much of the Oxfordian
[@Cope1980]. Important outcrops are in South Dorset, Oxfordshire, and
North Yorkshire [@Bradshaw1992]. Vertebrate remains from the Corallian
Group are rare [@Benton1995]. However, seven specimens have been
assigned to ichthyosaurs: OUMNH J50342, J52433--J52435, CAMSM J58841,
J10509, and J12051. Most of these isolated or short runs of vertebrae;
OUMNH J50342 is a coracoid referred to *Ophthalmosaurus*, but this is
not diagnostic. While ichthyosaur remains are certainly present in the
Corallian Group, they appear to only have been transient visitors.

### Kimmeridge Clay Formation {#KimmeridgeClay}

As one of the major source rocks for the North Sea oil industry, the
stratigraphy of the Kimmeridge Clay Formation has been intensely studied
offshore. Onshore deposits, by virtue of their ease of access and more
continuous exposure, have also received a great deal of attention,
although with less focus on the vertebrate palaeontology than the Oxford
Clay Formation. The Kimmeridge Clay Formation is closely associated with
the Oxford Clay Formation (together they form the major part of the
Ancholme Group), and so has a broadly similar outcrop across England,
from Dorset to Yorkshire
([1.2](#fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MUJ-outcrop-localities"}). Further important outcrops
that have produced vertebrate remains are found on the Isle of Skye
[@Arkell1933]. The Kimmeridge Clay Formation is dominated by calcareous
and organic-rich mudstones, with frequent oil shales, stone bands, and
concretion beds [@Cope1967; @Cox1981]. Its total thickness is over 500 m
in parts of South Dorset, the type area (\>541 m at Encombe Borehole, SZ
97127831; [@Barton2011]), spanning much of the uppermost Jurassic (see
below and
[\[fig:MUJ-stratigraphy\]](#fig:MUJ-stratigraphy){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MUJ-stratigraphy"}). It is traditionally divided into two
parts after the historic British Lower and Upper Kimmeridgian age
[@Cope1967; @Cox1981].

The Lower Kimmeridge Clay is bounded by the base of the *Torquirhynchia
inconstans* Bed (bed KC1) below and the base of bed KC36 above [bed
numbers after @Gallois2000], spanning the *Pictonia baylei* to
*Aulacostephanus autissiodorensis* ammonite biozones. The best exposures
of this unit are at Black Head (SY 729818), Kimmeridge Bay (SY 905792),
and Ringstead Bay (SY 761814), Dorset. Towards the bottom are several
siltstone beds (e.g. Wyke Siltstone, KC5, and Black Head Siltstone,
KC8), but the upper portion is mudstone- and oil shale-dominated. The
Upper Kimmeridge Clay spans the *Pectinatites elegans* to
*Virgatopavlovia fittoni* ammonite biozones, bounded by bed KC35 below
and the base of the Massive Bed in the Portland Group above. This
portion is completely exposed between Kimmeridge Bay and Chapman's Pool,
Dorset [@Gallois2000; @Barton2011]. The Upper Kimmeridge Clay is
generally more calcareous than the Lower Kimmeridge Clay, forming the
distinctive 'dolomitic ledges' of Kimmeridge Bay; organic-rich 'oil
shales' are more common in the middle of the formation (e.g. the
'Blackstone', bed KC42).

It is important to note that the International Stage boundary between
the Kimmeridgian and Tithonian is near the base of the *Hybonoticeras
hybonotum* Ammonite Biozone in the Tethyan domain [@Ogg2012]. This is
midway through the *Aulacostephanus autissiodorensis* Ammonite Biozone
in Britain. Therefore, the uppermost part of the Lower Kimmeridge Clay
and the Upper Kimmeridge Clay and Portland Group are Tithonian
([\[fig:MUJ-stratigraphy\]](#fig:MUJ-stratigraphy){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MUJ-stratigraphy"}).

#### Vertebrate fossils {#KimmeridgeClayVertebrates}

Vertebrate fossils are found more consistently throughout the Kimmeridge
Clay Formation than in the Oxford Clay Formation, but only certain
sections have produced abundant remains. The Wyke Siltstone (KC5) has
produced some recent striking remains of marine crocodilians and
pliosaurs [e.g. @Wilkinson2008; @Benson2013]. Marine reptile finds are
also common towards the top of the formation [@Taylor1986]. Notable
ichthyosaurian remains include *Nannopterygius enthekiodon*, possibly
from one of the *Aulacostephanus* sp. biozones [Lower Kimmeridge Clay;
@Arkell1933 p. 451], and *Brachypterygius extremus* from the
*Pectinatites wheatleyensis* Ammonite Biozone [Upper Kimmeridge Clay;
@McGowan1976]. Further remains of terrestrial dinosaurs are not uncommon
in the Kimmeridge Clay Formation. The exposures at Westbury, Wiltshire;
Ely, Cambridgeshire, and Cumnor, Oxfordshire, are also noted for their
vertebrate remains [@Arkell1933; @Benton1995; @Grange1996].

#### Interpretation {#KimmeridgeClayInterpretation}

The Kimmeridge Clay Formation is interpreted as a transgressive
sequence, overlying the shallower water Corallian Group. The Kimmeridge
Clay was deposited in a shallow epeiric sea that covered much of
England, Wales, and western Scotland [@Bradshaw1992]. This sea probably
did not exceed 50 m depth, as suggested by winnowing and storm beds
[@Wignall1994]. Dysoxia led to the preservation of organic matter, with
palaeoecological studies indicating occasional anoxic conditions
[@Wignall1990; @Wignall1991]; these alternations may indicate climatic
control and Milankovitch cyclicity [@Barton2011]. Higher proportions of
epifauna in the top part of the Upper Kimmeridge Clay (*Pectinatites
pectinatus* Ammonite Biozone and up) than below suggest a reduction in
sedimentation rates and firming of the substrate; below this, the
Kimmeridge Clay is more consistently infauna-dominated [@Wignall1990].

### Portland and Purbeck groups {#PortlandPurbeck}

Few ichthyosaurian remains have been found in the Portlandian (≈ upper
Tithonian) Portland and Purbeck groups [@Delair1968]. Two vertebrae (
NHMUK PV R1683 and R1684) from the Portland Oolite and Portlandian of
the Isle of Portland, Dorset, and three humeri ( OUMNH J1585, J1586, and
J1608) from the 'Portland Rock' (= Portland Stone Formation) of Swindon,
Wiltshire, are known. A partial ichthyosaur skeleton ( OUMNH J13795) has
been found in the Purbeck Limestone of Swanage, Dorset, but this has
since been identified as deriving from the Lower Cretaceous
[@Delair1968; @Ensom2009]. The Portland Group overlies the Kimmeridge
Clay Formation on the Isle of Portland, and is itself overlain by the
Purbeck Group. Outcrops are extensive in South Dorset (Isle of Portland
to Isle of Purbeck) but extend to Wiltshire, Oxfordshire,
Buckinghamshire, and The Weald [@Cope1980]. The sequence represents a
progressive shallowing and exposure through the Tithonian into the Early
Cretaceous. This is shown by the succession of sands and limestones with
cherts and oolites that comprise the Portland Sand and Portland Stone
formations respectively [@Arkell1933; @Barton2011]. The lowermost
(Jurassic) part of the Purbeck Group (lower Mupe Member) is marginal to
emergent, with occasional marine incursions [@Barton2011].

Material & Methods {#MaterialsMethods}
------------------

A large number of specimens from several collections were examined in
the process of completing the systematic descriptions below. These are
listed under the relevant headings, and in the Appendix
([4](#appendix:Ichthyosaurindet){reference-type="ref"
reference="appendix:Ichthyosaurindet"}). Much of this was derived from
the Leeds' Collection and other historical collections (see
[1.2](#history){reference-type="ref" reference="history"}); more
recently available specimens were also included. Dimensions, where
given, were taken using plastic callipers to the nearest 0.05 mm (0--140
mm), or tape measure to the nearest millimetre (\>140 mm). For each
taxa, the material is described; *Brachypterygius extremus* and
*Nannopterygius enthekiodon* are compared directly to *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, and comparisons of all three taxa to other ichthyosaurs are
made separately (see
[1.6](#OsteologicalComparisons){reference-type="ref"
reference="OsteologicalComparisons"}). Minor preparatory work was
carried out on specimen BRSMG Ce 16696
([1.32](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body"}) to expose the left forelimb. This
used air pens (sizes 2, 3, and chisel tip) to remove the overburden, and
air abrasive (AlO, 45 µm diameter). The preparation exposed the distal
portion of the left forelimb in ventral view as well as evidence of
remineralised soft tissue preservation. Ichthyosaur occurrence data in
the palaeogeographical map
([1.37](#fig:MLJichthyosaur-pbgeog){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MLJichthyosaur-pbgeog"}) was derived from Fossilworks
(<http://fossilworks.org>) and the Palaeobiology Database
(<http://paleobiodb.org/>) in January 2014 [@Alroy2013; @Alroy2013a]
with additional subsequent data taken directly from the literature. The
palaeogeographical maps
([1.37](#fig:MLJichthyosaur-pbgeog){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MLJichthyosaur-pbgeog"}) have been simplified from
@Blakey2008.

### Taxonomic philosophy {#TaxonomicPhilosophy}

The taxonomic philosophy applied here -- and throughout this thesis --
is that of phylogenetic taxonomy: the definition of taxa based upon
phylogeny as propounded by @Queiroz1992 [@Queiroz1992a] and in the
International Code of Phylogenetic Nomenclature (Phylocode;
<https://www.ohio.edu/phylocode/index.html>). This system provides a
useful taxonomic framework that, unlike Linnaean taxonomy, incorporates
evolution, but also allows variation as a result of new understanding
and testing of hypotheses (through new material and revised
phylogenies). When used correctly, the consistency of defined
taxa-clades provides nomenclatural stability, even though the topology
may change; I find this attractive. Concerns about phylogenetic taxonomy
have included its application and linkage between nomenclature and
taxonomy -- the *definitions* of taxa
[@Stuessy2000; @Queiroz2000; @Stuessy2001; @Queiroz2001] -- and its
utility as a classification tool [e.g. @Benton2000]; some of these
issues are semantic. Instability in both a Linnaean and phylogenetic
system are created *in partim* by incompatible concepts of what each
taxon refers to (its taxonomic component): either by disagreement on
taxonomically important characters, or the lack of such useful
characters being present.

More fundamentally, the use of genus as the basic unit of taxonomy
within (vertebrate )palaeontology -- as opposed to species more
generally in biology -- makes sense to me given the poorer set of
comparative data available (i.e. fewer individuals present across
greater time scales). Applied to ichthyosaurs, and other taxa from
lagerstätten, the increased number of specimens available within a
constrained time period and geographical location makes resolution to
the species level more certain by comparison. This may be one reason why
multi-species ichthyosaur genera have been preserved from deposits such
as the Lias of the UK, and the Posidonia Shale of south-western Germany.

Systematic Palaeontology
------------------------

### Taxa valida {#tax:taxavalida}

#### Remarks {#tax:Neoichthyosauria}

Neoichthyosauria was defined by @Sander2000 [22] as the last common
ancestor of *Temnodontosaurus platyodon* and *Ichthyosaurus,* and all
its descendants, and intended to incorporate all post-Triassic
ichthyosaurs. *Dearcmhara shawcrossi* [Brusatte *et al.*,
-@Brusatte2015] was recently described from the Bearreraig Sandstone
Formation (Toarcian--Bajocian) of the Isle of Skye, Scotland, United
Kingdom, as a Neoichthyosaurian. Because of its recent description and
uncertain occurrence, it is not included in this systematic
palaeontology section, however, comparisons are drawn below (see
[\[tax:comp:Dshawcrossi\]](#tax:comp:Dshawcrossi){reference-type="ref"
reference="tax:comp:Dshawcrossi"}).

#### Remarks {#remarks}

The clade Ophthalmosauridae (last common ancestor of *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* and *Arthropterygius chrisorum* [Russell, -@Russell1993], and
all its descendants, *sensu* @Fischer2011c) originated in the Middle
Jurassic [@Fischer2013a]. The name was originally used by @Baur1887, but
translated as Baptanodontidae in the English version [@Baur1887a].
@Motani1999c [p. 484] mistakenly attributed this taxon to @Appleby1956,
but renamed it Ophthalmosauria. *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and
*Brachypterygius extremus* are certainly present within this clade: the
definition of @Fischer2011c [p. 1020] is modified from Motani's
[-@Motani1999c p. 484] Ophthalmosauria, which these two taxa defined.
*Nannopterygius enthekiodon* has not yet been included in a phylogenetic
analysis of ichthyosaurs, but was included within Ophthalmosauridae by
@Motani1999c [484]; this taxon is included in Ophthalmosauridae here
also. The assignment of *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* to this clade is
discussed below.

#### Genus OPHTHALMOSAURUS [Seeley, -@Seeley1874] {#Ophthalmosaurus}

[\[OphthalmosaurustypeSpecies\]]{#OphthalmosaurustypeSpecies
label="OphthalmosaurustypeSpecies"}

Designated by @Seeley1874 [p. 707] as *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*;
described from the Oxford Clay Formation, Peterborough, Cambridgeshire,
United Kingdom.

[\[OphthalmosaurusSpecies\]]{#OphthalmosaurusSpecies
label="OphthalmosaurusSpecies"}

Currently, *Ophthalmosaurus* (*'Baptanodon'*) *natans* [Marsh,
-@Marsh1879] from the Upper Jurassic of the USA is considered a member
of this genus (see
[\[synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon\]](#synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon){reference-type="ref"
reference="synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon"}); also *Ophthalmosaurus
yasykovi*[Efimov, -@Efimov1999a] from the Upper Jurassic of Russia (see
[\[OphthalmosaurusDiscussion,OicenicusDiscussion\]](#OphthalmosaurusDiscussion,OicenicusDiscussion){reference-type="ref"
reference="OphthalmosaurusDiscussion,OicenicusDiscussion"}).

[\[OphthalmosaurusDiagnosis\]]{#OphthalmosaurusDiagnosis
label="OphthalmosaurusDiagnosis"}

Moderately large (about 4 m) member of Ophthalmosauridae characterised
by: premaxillae and dentaries divergent anteriorly (autapomorphy); small
premaxilla-lachrymal contact; maxilla excluded from external naris in
lateral view by lachrymal and premaxilla (more extensive exposure in
*Athabascasaurus, Cryopterygius, Platypterygius australis*); narial
process on nasal present (absent in *Caypullisaurus, Platypterygius*);
frontal with small participation in supratemporal fenestra (excluded in
*Athabascasaurus*; greater participation in *Platypterygius australis,
Platypterygius hercynicus, Sveltonectes*); squamosal present and
triangular (absent in *Platypterygius americanus, Platypterygius
australis*; square in *Athabascasaurus*); large orbit (\>0.2 orbital
ratio); paroccipital process slender (shared with *Acamptonectes*);
short postorbital region (broader in *Brachypterygius, Caypullisaurus,
Cryopterygius*); basioccipital with broad extracondylar area visible
around articular condyle (narrower in *Acamptonectes, Athabascasaurus,
Brachypterygius, Platypterygius*); left and right extracondylar areas of
the basioccipital separated ventrally by a ridge (continuous in
*Acamptonectes, Leninia*); stapes contacts supratemporal laterally
(shared with *Leninia*); teeth small and strongly ridged (smaller than
*Brachypterygius, Platypterygius*; weaker ridging in *Maiaspondylus,
Platypterygius americanus*);  48 (\>44) teeth present in each upper jaw
(53 in *Cryopterygius, Brachypterygius*); anterior teeth located in
sockets (autapomorphy); \~42 presacral vertebrae (48--54 in
*Platypterygius*; 52 in *Aegirosaurus, Caypullisaurus*); ribs with
anterior and posterior longitudinal grooves (rounded with single
proximal groove in *Acamptonectes*); clavicles expose interclavicle
between them at their medial meeting point (autapomorphy); clavicles
wrap around and enclose anterior bar of interclavicle (autapomorphy);
posterior margin of coracoid rounded (angled transversely in
*Nannopterygius*; squared in *Cryopterygius*); humerus with three distal
articular facets, anterior facet is the smallest, posterior facet is
deflected posteriorly, articulating with pre-axial accessory element,
radius, and ulna (two distal facets in *Cryopterygius, Nannopterygius*;
humerus articulates with radius, intermedium, and ulna in
*Brachypterygius, Maiaspondylus, Aegirosaurus*; four distal humeral
facets in *Platypterygius hercynicus*); forelimb with six digits (more
in *Caypullisaurus, Platypterygius*); ulna tapers posteriorly with a
concave posterior margin in dorsal view (shared with *Acamptonectes*);
single preaxial accessory digit (two in *Platypterygius,
Caypullisaurus*); forelimb phalanges rounded (polygonal in
*Aegirosaurus, Brachypterygius, Platypterygius*); ischium and pubis
fused and plate-like with enclosed obturator foramen (unfused distally
in *Cryopterygius, Undorosaurus*; obturator foramen lost in
*Aegirosaurus, Athabascasaurus, Platypterygius australis,
Sveltonectes*); femur with well developed dorsal and ventral processes
(larger in *Platypterygius*); femur with two distal facets (three in
*Platypterygius australis, Platypterygius hercynicus*); hindlimb
phalanges rounded (polygonal in *Platypterygius*).

[\[OphthalmosaurusEtymology\]]{#OphthalmosaurusEtymology
label="OphthalmosaurusEtymology"}

The generic name *Ophthalmosaurus* derives from the Greek *οφθαλμός*:
'eye' and *σαύρα*: 'lizard', for the relatively and absolutely large
orbit.

[\[OphthalmosaurusDiscussion\]]{#OphthalmosaurusDiscussion
label="OphthalmosaurusDiscussion"}

@Seeley1874 named the new genus *Ophthalmosaurus* from Mr Charles Leeds'
collection from the Oxford Clay Formation, separating it from
*Ichthyosaurus* as the clavicles meet medially in an interdigitating
suture and wrap around the anterior of the interclavicle, and naming the
type species *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* (see
[\[OicenicusDiscussion\]](#OicenicusDiscussion){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusDiscussion"}). @Marsh1879 described *Sauranodon
natans* [Marsh, -@Marsh1879] for a specimen from the Oxfordian Sundance
Formation of the "Rocky-Mountain region" (p. 175) of North America
[indicated as Como Bluff, Wyoming, USA, in @McGowan2003 p. 115], placing
this in the new Order Sauranodonta. Later, @Marsh1880b realised
*Sauranodon* was preoccupied, and suggested the replacement name
*Baptanodon*. @Marsh1880a seemingly misinterpreted the forelimbs that he
described as hindlimbs, so that they appeared vastly different from
those of other then known ichthyosaurs. There then followed a
long-running argument as to whether *Ophthalmosaurus* and *Baptanodon*
were generically distinct; this will be discussed further below (see
[\[synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon\]](#synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon){reference-type="ref"
reference="synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon"}). Gilmore's
[-@Gilmore1902] discovery of teeth in a specimen of *Baptanodon* led him
to separate this into the genus *Microdontosaurus* [Gilmore,
-@Gilmore1902], but this name was withdrawn after teeth were found in
the holotype of *Baptanodon* [@Gilmore1903].

@Mehl1927 [@Mehl1928] described *Apatodonosaurus* [Mehl, -@Mehl1927]
from fragmentary material he described from the Sundance Formation of
Wyoming, USA. The forelimb configuration of *Apatodonosaurus* is
consistent with *Ophthalmosaurus*, although @Mehl1928 listed several
apparently unique characters; @Kirton1983 attributed this to
misinterpretation of the material. @Romer1956
[@Kirton1983; @McGowan2003] considered *Apatodonosaurus* to be a
subjective junior synonym of *Ophthalmosaurus*. @Rusconi1938
[@Rusconi1940] described new materials from the Late Jurassic of
Argentina as *Myobradypterygius* [Huene, -@Huene1927], but later erected
the genus *Ancanamunia* [Rusconi, -@Rusconi1942] for this material. A
more complete description was given by @Rusconi1948, showing features
that are consistent with *Ophthalmosaurus*. However, @Rusconi1942 did
not figure the material, and inadequate description led @Gasparini1985
to consider *Ancanamunia* a *nomen vanum* [@Fernandez2007a]. @Kirton1983
suggested that *Ancanamunia* is a subjective junior synonym of
*Ophthalmosaurus*, which was corroborated by @McGowan2003, while
@Fernandez2007a only considered material referred to *Ancanamunia
mendozana* [Rusconi, -@Rusconi1942] to be a junior subjective synonym of
*Ophthalmosaurus natans*. Much of the material that @Rusconi1938
[@Rusconi1940; @Rusconi1942; @Rusconi1948; @Rusconi1949] described is
incomplete and cannot be confidently referred to any taxon, while
material referred to *Ichthyosaurus inexpectatus* [Rusconi,
-@Rusconi1948] has since been suggested to be from the metriorhynchid
*Dakosaurus* [Quenstedt, -@Quenstedt1856]
[@Vignaud1996; @Fernandez2007a].

More recent discoveries of ichthyosaurs from the Upper Jurassic of
Russia provided the basis for several new taxa. Unfortunately, the
descriptions and figures of these are often limited, making detailed
comparisons difficult, but new efforts are being made to make these
fossils available and present revised descriptions. @Arkhangelsky1997
erected *Paraophthalmosaurus* for a new specimen with a semilunate
radius and oblique and straight posterior edges on the coracoids. A
later reinterpretation of the forelimb material changed this
[@Arkhangelsky1998]: the semilunate element was formed by fusion of the
radiale and an anterior accessory element; what was referred to as the
ulna was actually the radius; and the true ulna was not present.
Arkhangelsky's [-@Arkhangelsky1998] emended diagnosis for
*Paraophthalmosaurus* is consistent with *Ophthalmosaurus*; the two were
synonymised by @Maisch2000c [p. 78] and @McGowan2003 [p. 110]. However,
recent cladistic analysis has found that *Paraophthalmosaurus* forms a
clade separate from *Ophthalmosaurus*, although the resolution within
Ophthalmosaurinae is low [@Arkhangelsky2014]; this incorporates
*'Yasykovia' kabanovi* [Efimov, -@Efimov1999], which is revised to
*Paraophthalmosaurus kabanovi*. The girdle in *Paraophthalmosaurus
kabanovi* [@Efimov1999 figs 4ж, з] has a bipartite scapula-coracoid
articulation, divided by a coracoidal fenestra. This we have not seen in
examined British material referred to *Ophthalmosaurus*, although
@Johnson1979 and @Maisch2000c [p. 89] state it is found in other well
ossified 'stenopterygiid' and ophthalmosaurid taxa, as in
*'Stenopterygius megalorhinus'* [Huene, -@Huene1922] (= *Stenopterygius
triscissus* [Quenstedt, -@Quenstedt1858]; [@Huene1949; @Maisch2008b])
and *'Ophthalmosaurus monocharactus'* [@Gasparini1988]. Also, the femur
of *Paraophthalmosaurus kabanovi* has three distal facets [if this is
correctly identified: @Efimov1999 fig. 5г], which is different to
*Ophthalmosaurus* ([1.6](#OsteologicalComparisons){reference-type="ref"
reference="OsteologicalComparisons"}). Pending revision of the
*Paraophthalmosaurus saveljeviensis* type material, we retain
*Paraophthalmosaurus* as valid.

*Khudiakovia* [Arkhangelsky, -@Arkhangelsky1999] was erected for a
humerus, radius, ulna, radiale, and intermedium, with impressions of
surrounding elements. This specimen exhibits the features of
*Ophthalmosaurus* and was also synonymised into that genus by
@Maisch2000c [p. 90] and @McGowan2003 [p. 110].

@Efimov1999 erected four species in the genus *Yasykovia* [Efimov,
-@Efimov1999], which has clear morphological affinities with
*Ophthalmosaurus* (e.g. three distal humeral facets for the preaxial
accessory element, radius, and ulna respectively), yet did not compare
his new materials with that genus in the original notice. The
differences between the species are small, and @Maisch2000c attributed
these to ontogeny or intraspecific variation, recognising only one
species: *Yasykovia yasykovi* [Efimov, -@Efimov1999]. The figured teeth
[@Efimov1999 fig. 2] have more slender crowns and more bulbous roots
than in *Ophthalmosaurus* (see
[\[OicenicusDentition\]](#OicenicusDentition){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusDentition"}), but are otherwise similar. Most of the
pectoral girdles figured [@Efimov1999 fig. 4] are like those found in
*Ophthalmosaurus*. *Yasykovia* was not found to be sufficiently
different from *Ophthalmosaurus* to require its own generic identity by
both @Maisch2000c [pp 78, 89] and @McGowan2003 [p. 110] and was
synonymised. This view will be retained here, excluding the
*Paraophthalmosaurus kabanovi* material, although detailed reappraisal
of the material is necessary. Further discussion on specific synonymy is
included below (see
[\[OicenicusDiscussion\]](#OicenicusDiscussion){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusDiscussion"}).

Traditionally, *Ophthalmosaurus* was primarily diagnosed on the
configuration of the pectoral girdle and the three distal humeral
facets, articulating with a preaxial accessory element, the radius, and
ulna respectively (see and [@Seeley1874]). The discovery of
*Ophthalmosaurus natans* and more recent taxa, such as *Undorosaurus
gorodischensis* and *Arthropterygius chrisorum*, have reduced the latter
character's utility to family level, instead being characteristic of
several ophthalmosaurid ichthyosaur genera, but several other diagnostic
features may be used in addition (see
[\[OphthalmosaurusDiagnosis\]](#OphthalmosaurusDiagnosis){reference-type="ref"
reference="OphthalmosaurusDiagnosis"}). @Maisch2000c and @Maisch2010
referred both *Undorosaurus* [Efimov, -@Efimov1999] and *Mollesaurus*
[Fernández, -@Fernandez1999] to *Ophthalmosaurus*, arguing that the
purported differences were insubstantial, arising from poor preservation
or individual variation. @McGowan2003 agreed that all three taxa are
very similar, with few distinguishing features, but retained their
generic separation until more complete material was available. The
specimen described by @Gasparini1988 as *Ophthalmosaurus monocharactus*
is unlikely to be *Ophthalmosaurus* based on characters of the forelimb:
four distal facets (the posterior facet articulates with a posterior
accessory element), and forelimb elements more angular and closely
packed. @Maisch2000c allied this to similar German material, as
suggested by @Gasparini1988, which has since been described as
*Aegirosaurus* [@Bardet2000]. A similar humerus, with four distal
facets, from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation of Kimmeridge, UK, can be
seen in the private collection of Mr Steve Etches. Efforts are underway
to bring this material into availability.

[\[Oicenicus\]]{#Oicenicus label="Oicenicus"}

rlp13cm v . & *[-@Seeley1869]* & *Ichthyosaurus megalodeirus* Seeley;
p. 111 \[*nom. nud.*\] \[Oxford Clay Formation (Callovian Stage),
Peterborough, UK\].\
v\* & [-@Seeley1874] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; p. 707, pls
45, 46 \[Oxford Clay Formation, Peterborough, UK\].\
& *[-@Lydekker1888]* & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Lydekker,
p. 310 \[Oxford Clay & Kimmeridge Clay formations, UK\].\
v & [-@Lydekker1889] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Lydekker,
p. 9, fig. 7.\
v & [-@Lydekker1890] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Lydekker,
p. 267, fig. 62.\
v . & [-@Lydekker1890] & *Ophthalmosaurus pleydelli* Lydekker, p. 268,
figs 63, 64 \[Kimmeridge Clay Formation (Kimmeridgian Stage),
Gillingham, Dorset, UK\].\
v . & [-@Mansel-Pleydell1890] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley;
Mansell-Pleydell, fig. 2.\
v & [-@Mansel-Pleydell1890] & *Ophthalmosaurus pleydelli* Lydekker;
Mansell-Pleydell, p. 14, figs 3, 4.\
? & [-@Bauer1898] & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* Owen; Bauer, p. 325
\[*nom. dub.*\] \[*pars.*\].\
& *[-@Gilmore1905]* & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Gilmore,
p. 125.\
v & [-@Andrews1907] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Andrews.\
v & *[-@Gilmore1907]* & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Gilmore,
fig. 2 \[cop. [@Seeley1874]\].\
& [-@Seeley1908] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Seeley.\
v & [-@Andrews1910] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Andrews, p. 1,
figs 1--42, pls 1, 2.\
v & *[-@Andrews1915]* & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Andrews,
pl. 5.\
& [-@Huene1922b] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Huene, p. 89,
pl. 19, fig. 10 \[cop. [@Andrews1910]\].\
. & *[-@Kuhn1934]* & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Kuhn, p. 36.\
& *[-@Kuhn1934]* & *Ophthalmosaurus pleydelli* Lydekker; Kuhn, p. 41.\
*non* & *[-@Kuhn1934]* & *Baptanodon* (Marsh); Kuhn, p. 36.\
& *[-@Kuhn1946]* & *Ophtalmosaurus* \[*sic.*\] *icenicus* Seeley; Kuhn,
p. 78 \[*lapsus calami*\].\
v & [-@Appleby1956] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Appleby,
p. 444.\
v . & [-@Appleby1956] & *Ophthalmosaurus monocharactus* Appleby,
p. 444.\
v & [-@Appleby1958] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Appleby, pp 8,
10, pl. 6.\
v . & [-@Appleby1958] & *Ophthalmosaurus monocharactus* Appleby; pp
9--10, 35, pl. 1.\
v & [-@Appleby1958] & *Ophthalmosaurus* sp.; Appleby, pp 13, 39, pls
2--5, 7.\
v & [-@McGowan1976] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; McGowan, figs 2
d, e.\
v & [-@Appleby1979] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Appleby,
p. 931, fig. 10 d.\
& *[-@Mazin1982]* & *Ophtalmosaurus* \[*sic.*\] *icenicus* Sealey
\[*sic.*\]; Mazin, p. 97.\
. & *[-@Mazin1982]* & *Ophtalmosaurus* \[*sic.*\] *monocharactus*
Appleby; Mazin, p. 97 \[authority given as "Appleby, 1965" (*sic.*)\].\
\[v & [-@Kirton1983] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Kirton, p. 11,
figs 1--36, pls 1--3.\]\
& *[-@Martill1987]* & *Ophthalmosaurus* sp.; Martill, p. 543, fig. 1
\[Lower Oxford Clay Formation, Caldecotte Lake, Milton Keynes\].\
& [-@Massare1987] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Massare, p. 137,
fig. 6 b.\
*non* & [-@Gasparini1988] & *Ophthalmosaurus monocharactus* Appleby;
Gasparini \[Vaca Muerta Formation, Cantera El Ministerio, Argentina (38°
49' S, 70° 12' E)\].\
& *[-@Bardet1991]* & *Ophtalmosaurus* \[*sic.*\] *icenicus* Seeley;
Bardet *et al.*, p. 898.\
& *[-@Martill1991a]* & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Martill,
p. 229, fig. 10.5 a.\
. & *[-@Martill1991a]* & *Ophthalmosaurus monocharactus* Appleby;
Martill, p. 229, fig. 10.5 b.\
& [-@Efimov1991] & *Ophthalmosaurus undorensis* Efimov; p. 112, figs 1,
2 \[*Aulacostephanus mutabilis* Ammonite Biozone, Volgian Stage, Undory,
Russian Federation\].\
v & [-@Maisch1997a] & *Ophthalmosaurus* sp.; Maisch, figs 2--5.\
v & [-@Maisch1998d] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Maisch,
fig. 1.\
v & [-@Arkhangelsky1999] & *Khudiakovia calloviensis* Arkhangelsky;
p. 89, fig. 1 \[Lower Volgian Stage, Saratov Region, Russian
Federation\].\
? & [-@Efimov1999] & *Yasykovia yasykovi* Efimov; p. 93, figs 1, 2 а, 4
а, б, 5 а, б \[*Craspedites subdites* Zone, Volgian Stage, Ulyanovsk
Region, Russian Federation\].\
? & [-@Efimov1999] & *Yasykovia mittai* Efimov; p. 97, fig. 4 д, е
\[*Kachpurites fulgens* Zone, Volgian Stage, Podmoskaya, Khorlovo,
Russian Federation\].\
? & [-@Efimov1999] & *Yasykovia sumini* Efimov; p. 98, fig. 4 в, г, 6 а,
в \[*Kachpurites fulgens* Zone, Volgian Stage, Podmoskaya, Khorlovo,
Russian Federation\].\
*non* & [-@Efimov1999] & *Yasykovia kabanovi* Efimov; p. 98, fig. 2 в,
г, 3 ж, з, 4 ж, з, 5 в, г, 6 г, е \[*Epivirgatites nikitini* Zone,
Volgian Stage, Gorodishchi, Ulyanovsk Oblast, Russian Federation\].\
v & [-@Motani1999] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Motani, p. 39,
fig. 7 a \[[mod. @Kirton1983]\].\
v & [-@Motani1999c] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Motani, p. 485,
figs 2 g, 3 g \[[mod. @Kirton1983]\], 5 N, 6 L.\
v & [-@Sander2000] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Sander, p. 19,
figs 2 f, 3 d, 4 f, 13.\
v & [-@Maisch2000c] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Maisch &
Matzke, p. 78, figs 8, 12, 13, 19 c--f, 23, 28 (all *pars.*).\
& [-@Maisch2000c] & *Khudiakovia calloviensis* Arkhangelsky; Maisch &
Matzke, p. 90.\
v & [-@McGowan2003] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; McGowan &
Motani, p. 113, fig. 93 \[cop. [@Motani1999c fig.  2G]\], pls 16, 17
\[*pars.*\].\
& [-@Massare2006] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Massare *et al.*,
figs 3 b, 4, 5.\
v & [-@Araujo2008] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Araújo *et al.*,
figs 2, 7, 8.\
& [-@Buchy2010a] & *Ophthalmosaurus* cf. *icenicus* Seeley; Buchy
p. 149, figs 2--4 \[La Caja Formation, early Tithonian Stage, Sierra El
Jabalí, Mexico\].\
v & [-@Fischer2012] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Fischer *et
al.*, figs 5 H, I, 6 h.\
v & [-@Maxwell2012b] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Maxwell *et
al.*, p. 1209, fig. 1 p--t.\
& *[-@Motani2015a]* & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Motani *et
al.*, fig.  2H\

[\[OicenicusType\]]{#OicenicusType label="OicenicusType"}

Holotype: NHMUK PV R2133, a partial skeleton, designated by @Seeley1874
[p. 699, pls 15, 16, figs 1, 2], from the Oxford Clay Formation of
Peterborough, UK. Paratype: NHMUK PV R2134, a left forelimb, figured by
@Seeley1874 [pl. 46, fig. 3], from the type locality and horizon. See
[\[OicenicusDiscussion\]](#OicenicusDiscussion){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusDiscussion"} for allocation of these type specimens.

[\[OicenicusReferred\]]{#OicenicusReferred label="OicenicusReferred"}

Diagnostic material includes GLAHM V1070, v1611, v1612, v1885, v1916,
v1920; NHMUK PV R2132, r2138, r2149, r2160, r2180, r2181, r2182, r2185,
r3013, r3535, r3702, r3893, r4753, r8737, r10031, r10032; PETMG R220,
r222, r335. All of these are from the Oxford Clay Formation of
Peterborough and the surrounding area. Additional British material
referable to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* is listed in
[\[tbl:Oicenicus-specimens\]](#tbl:Oicenicus-specimens){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:Oicenicus-specimens"}.

[\[OicenicusDiagnosis\]]{#OicenicusDiagnosis label="OicenicusDiagnosis"}

Maxilla excluded from external naris by lachrymal and premaxilla
(included in *Ophthalmosaurus natans*, *Ophthalmosaurus yasykovi*);
prefrontal contacts external naris but this contact is small (does not
contact in *Ophthalmosaurus natans*); jugal broad and fan-like
anteriorly (tapering in *Ophthalmosaurus natans*, *Ophthalmosaurus
yasykovi*); exoccipitals form more of the dorsoventral margin of the
*foramen magnum* than the supraoccipital (reversed in *Ophthalmosaurus
natans*); teeth strongly ridged (may be smoother in *Ophthalmosaurus
natans*); tooth bases slender and sub-quadrangular (autapomorphy;
rounder in *Ophthalmosaurus natans*; quadrangular and bulbous in
*Brachypterygius, Maiaspondylus, Platypterygius, Undorosaurus*); no
fusion between atlas-axis neural spines (sometimes present in
*Ophthalmosaurus natans*); clavicles meet medially in unfused
interdigitating suture (autapomorphy; fused in *Ophthalmosaurus
natans*); coracoids rounded posteriorly (elongate in *Ophthalmosaurus
yasykovi*; divergent in *Ophthalmosaurus saveljeviensis*); scapula
glenoid contribution larger than coracoid contribution (smaller in
*Ophthalmosaurus natans*); deltopectoral crest as high as the dorsal
trochanter (smaller in *Ophthalmosaurus natans*, *Ophthalmosaurus
yasykovi*).

[\[OicenicusEtymology\]]{#OicenicusEtymology label="OicenicusEtymology"}

The specific name *icenicus*, from the Latin 'of the Iceni', refers to a
tribe that occupied the type area before and during the Roman conquest
of Britain.

[\[OicenicusOccurrence\]]{#OicenicusOccurrence
label="OicenicusOccurrence"}

Diagnostic material is known from the Callovian--Tithonian of southern
England, France, and Mexico.

[\[OicenicusDiscussion\]]{#OicenicusDiscussion
label="OicenicusDiscussion"}

@Seeley1874 described material from the Oxford Clay Formation of
Peterborough, in the collection of Mr Charles Leeds as *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*. There, Seeley did not mention his earlier description of
Oxford Clay material from the collection of Dr Henry Porter, upon which
he erected *Ichthyosaurus megalodeirus*. This latter material was,
however, not truly described, diagnosed, or figured, and the available
pieces of the specimens were merely listed; this does not fulfil the
requirements for an indication by the International Code of Zoological
Nomenclature (ICZN) article 12.2 ([@ICZN2012 amended 2012]; see also
[\[Imegalodeirus\]](#Imegalodeirus){reference-type="ref"
reference="Imegalodeirus"}). In the original description of
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, @Seeley1874 described two specimens, of
which the first (NHMUK PV R2133) was indicated as "the type of a new
species" [@Seeley1874 p. 699] and should be considered the holotype for
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. This term was not applied to the second
specimen described in that paper (NHMUK PV R2134): Seeley included this
specimen to more clearly show the generic differences of
*Ophthalmosaurus*. Under ICZN Article 72.4.5 and Recommendation 73 d,
this specimen (part of the type series) should be labelled as the
paratype for *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.

@Lydekker1890 [p. 268] erected *Ophthalmosaurus pleydelli* for a humerus
and presacral vertebral centrum from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation of
Gillingham, Dorset, which were later described by @Mansel-Pleydell1890
(see [\[Opleydelli\]](#Opleydelli){reference-type="ref"
reference="Opleydelli"}). These specimens were associated with further
skull fragments and a vertebra. The humerus was distinguished primarily
by being shorter and having shorter and wider distal facets than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. These characters are within the
intraspecific variation found for specimens referred to *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, and so *Ophthalmosaurus pleydelli* may be rejected as a
subjective junior synonym. @Appleby1956 considered *Ophthalmosaurus
pleydelli* to be a junior synonym of either *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
or *Ophthalmosaurus monocharactus*, and @Kirton1983 considered this a
junior synonym of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.

@Appleby1956 [p. 444] separated the holotype (NHMUK PV R2133) coracoids
of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and another specimen (LEICT 100'1949/20)
in the New Walk Museum, Leicester, from other coracoids referred to
*Ophthalmosaurus*. These two specimens presented two notches on the
coracoid: an anterolateral notch that is common to Jurassic and
Cretaceous ichthyosaurs, and a second notch in the posterior margin.
@Appleby1956 retained these two specimens in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*,
and placed the 41 or so specimens with single-notched coracoids in a new
species, *Ophthalmosaurus monocharactus* [Appleby, -@Appleby1956]. As
the number of coracoidal notches was the only diagnostic feature given
by Appleby, the vast majority of specimens previously referred to
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, but without coracoids, could then only be
assigned to *Ophthalmosaurus* sp. However, in the holotype specimen of
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, with both coracoids present, the left
coracoid that @Seeley1874 did not describe and figure is incomplete
posteriorly, while other left-side elements exhibit gross pathology,
especially the scapula, which is strongly disfigured and has become
fused to the left clavicle. Seeley also misorientated the coracoid that
he figured laterally and anteroposteriorly, initially calling it the
right coracoid. This inverted the intercoracoidal and glenoid facets,
resulting in narrow anterior and wider posterior notches, both placed
more medially than in other ichthyosaurs (see
[\[OicenicusCoracoid\]](#OicenicusCoracoid){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusCoracoid"}). A later correction [@Seeley1893 p. 151,
footnote; @Kirton1983] that this should instead be a left coracoid
removed the lateral inversion. The interpretation of @Kirton1983 that
the bone @Seeley1874 [pl. 45, fig. 1] figured should be a right coracoid
in ventral view is followed here as it is consistent with other referred
coracoids that are or were known in articulation: the medial facet is
broader and angled slightly dorsally, and the anteromedial edge bears a
facet for articulation with the interclavicle [@Kirton1983 p. 15; see
[\[OicenicusCoracoid\]](#OicenicusCoracoid){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusCoracoid"}]. @Andrews1910 [p. 46] considered the
posterior notch in the right coracoid of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* to
be deformation from the pathology affecting the left side of the
pectoral girdle. @Appleby1956 [439], in light of the new specimen LEICT
100'1949/20, regarded the number of notches present to be a valid
character and of taxonomic importance at the specific level. Kirton's
[-@Kirton1983 pp 14--17] discussion of this noted that the posterior
notch [anterior notch of @Seeley1874 pl. 45, fig. 1] has a different
form and placement to the anterior notch in that bone, and to coracoidal
notches present in other ichthyosaur taxa. In particular, the posterior
notch in NHMUK PV R2133 is a deep invagination of the posterior margin,
whereas the anterior notch (although incomplete) is shallower, wider,
and more similar to that seen in other specimens of *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*; the same applies to LEICT 100'1949/20. @Kirton1983 [p. 16]
likened this form of the posterior notch more to a "fenestration, or an
incision in the coracoidal plate, rather than being merely an
indentation of the postero-lateral border". Variation in the coracoidal
notching is present both within and between Lower Jurassic ichthyosaur
taxa, as in *Ichthyosaurus* and *Stenopterygius* [Jaekel, -@Jaekel1904]
[@McGowan1974; @McGowan1979]. In specimens of *Stenopterygius* with two
notches, the posterior notch is a wider embayment, like the anterior
notch, rather than the narrower cut into the coracoid seen in NHMUK PV
R2133 and LEICT 100'1949/20. As the coracoids of LEICT 100'1949/20 are
the only parts known from this individual, and they show no clear
deformation, it is uncertain whether the posterior notches here too are
effected by pathology. The evidence supports @Kirton1983 and subsequent
authors, such as @McGowan2003, in regarding *Ophthalmosaurus
monocharactus* as a subjective junior synonym of *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, and this view is followed here
([\[Omonocharactus\]](#Omonocharactus){reference-type="ref"
reference="Omonocharactus"}).

As mentioned in the generic-name discussion above
([\[OphthalmosaurusDiscussion\]](#OphthalmosaurusDiscussion){reference-type="ref"
reference="OphthalmosaurusDiscussion"}), the Upper Jurassic material
from Russia is in need of further detailed study and taxonomic
reappraisal. The specimens upon which these taxa are based are poorly
preserved, leading to their uncertain affinities. *Ophthalmosaurus
undorensis* [Efimov, -@Efimov1991] was erected on a humerus, atlas-axis,
and two vertebral centra. The humerus is consistent with material for
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and so *Ophthalmosaurus undorensis* is
considered a junior subjective synonym of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.
The same applies to *Khudiakovia calloviensis* [Arkhangelsky,
-@Arkhangelsky1999], which is known only from forelimb material
[@Arkhangelsky1999]. *Paraophthalmosaurus* (= *Ophthalmosaurus sensu*
[@Maisch2000c]) *saveljeviensis* [Arkhangelsky, -@Arkhangelsky1997] and
*Paraophthalmosaurus saratoviensis* [Arkhangelsky, -@Arkhangelsky1998]
were considered synonymous by @McGowan2003 [p. 127], and a species
*inquirenda*, possibly referable to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*;
@Maisch2010 retained *Ophthalmosaurus saveljeviensis* as a separate
species. In Arkhangelsky & Zverkov's [-@Arkhangelsky2014] cladistic
analysis, *Paraophthalmosaurus saveljeviensis* and *Paraophthalmosaurus
kabanovi* are recovered as sister taxa within Ophthalmosaurinae, and
separate to *Ophthalmosaurus* (see
[\[OphthalmosaurusDiscussion\]](#OphthalmosaurusDiscussion){reference-type="ref"
reference="OphthalmosaurusDiscussion"}). The four species in *Yasykovia*
were synonymised with *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* by @McGowan2003
[p.113], although @Maisch2000c [@Maisch2010] considered them a single
separate species: *Ophthalmosaurus yasykovi*. While many features are
consistent between the two species, others may be taxonomically
important (e.g. humerus longest/widest proximally, coracoid
proportions). In this case, *Ophthalmosaurus yasykovi* is provisionally
retained as separate from *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. However,
*'Yasykovia' kabanovi* has been referred to *Paraophthalmosaurus* by
@Arkhangelsky2014.

![image](./img/fig-Oicenicus-skull-latdor.png){width="19cm"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat
label="fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor
label="fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor"}

![image](./img/fig-Oicenicus-ventralskull-palate.png){width="17.5cm"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof
label="fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-palate\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-palate
label="fig:Oicenicus-palate"}

[\[OicenicusPremaxilla\]]{#OicenicusPremaxilla
label="OicenicusPremaxilla"}

The elongate premaxillae form most of the pre-narial rostrum and of the
length of the skull generally
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-palate,tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-palate,tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-palate,tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements"}).
They are rather low anteriorly, but increase in height posteriorly
towards the contact with the nasals and external naris. In dorsal view,
the anterior portions are nearly straight, but are deflected laterally
in the posterior half, enclosing the nasals dorsally and vomers
ventrally between the two premaxillae. The external surface has a convex
curve dorsally that gives the rostrum a trapezoidal outline when the two
premaxillae are articulated. Each premaxilla is [A]{.sans-serif}-shaped
in cross section; this is produced by combination of the lateral wall
and a medial flange that extends along the whole length of the bone,
bounding the alveolar groove between them. Towards the posterior end of
the premaxilla, the lateral wall and medial flange diverge into two
long, relatively thin projections (lateral and medial), oriented
posteroventrally, holding between them the maxilla, which continues the
alveolar groove posteriorly at this point. These are infrequently
preserved, but are mostly complete in GLAHM V1921 and NHMUK PV R2160.
The lateral wall forms a long process that envelops the maxilla
laterally for much of its length, extending towards, and meeting, the
external naris. Here the process diverges around the anterior margin of
the external naris forming a small, rounded supranarial process and much
larger subnarial process. This subnarial process extends ventral to the
external naris for about one-half of its length, tapering posteriorly
and overlying the lateral face of the maxilla. The medial flange extends
posteriorly between the maxilla and vomer until contacting the internal
naris; the lateral face of this flange forms a small part of the
anteromedial border to the internal naris.

The premaxillae are in contact with each other for much of their dorsal
length, in a simple butt joint. From about two-thirds of the pre-narial
length posteriorly, around half the length of the premaxilla itself, the
nasals are exposed dorsally between the premaxillae, separating the
lateral projections. At this point, @Andrews1910 noted the presence of
an elongate roughened surface that he attributed to ligamentous
connection between the premaxillae. The anterior portions of the two
premaxillae remain separate when articulated; the space left would
likely have been filled with connective tissue. This anterior extension
tapers to a point, both laterally and dorsoventrally, which contradicts
Andrews' [-@Andrews1910 p. 24] description that they "terminate in a
blunt point". This may be because material he studied was not complete
owing to the delicate nature of this area and the portion of unossified
material (e.g.  NHMUK PV R3702; [@Andrews1915]). Each nasal runs in a
groove along its contact on the medial sides of the premaxillae, which
anterior to their dorsal exclusion by the premaxillae, becomes a medial
channel between the contacts of the premaxillae dorsally and alveolar
grooves ventrally. In this channel, ventral to the nasals, run the thin
anterior projections of the vomers, which are applied to the medial side
of the lingual wall for almost its entire length. The vomers are exposed
between the premaxillae for much of its length. The channel is narrowed
anteriorly by the closing dorsal and ventral walls as the premaxilla
becomes lower, but it does not close completely, and feeds into a larger
anterior vacuity that corresponds to the anterior separation of the
premaxillae.

A longitudinal groove runs along much of the lateral surface of the
premaxilla from just anterior to the external naris contact anteriorly,
just dorsal to the alveolar groove. Numerous foramina open onto the
floor of this groove, becoming smaller and more frequent anteriorly. At
its anterior extent, the groove becomes discontinuous and is reduced to
a series of small pits. These foramina connect to a hollow intraosseous
channel that runs along the length of the premaxilla, which also
connects to foramina from the internal surface. These foramina likely
show the passage of nerves and blood vessels that served the external
rostral tissues. The presence of these structures in many ichthyosaurs
led @Romer1968 to suggest the presence of a horny bill, albeit of
unusual type, although he denied the possibility of fleshy lips
[*contra* @Kirton1983]. The presence of such structures however seems
unlikely.

The alveolar groove extends from the anteriormost point of the
premaxilla, and tooth impressions can be seen as shallow, rounded
depressions in its floor separated by low, transverse septa on the
lingual wall between the tooth positions. There may also be grooves
opposite these depressions on the labial wall. These are stronger and
smaller anteriorly; the depressions become more socket-like in this
region indicating the teeth held here were smaller, which is shown well
in NHMUK PV R3893; this feature, alongside the divergence of the
premaxillae anteriorly is unique to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* among
ichthyosaurs. Tooth impression size increases posteriorly, with the
largest impressions being around the midpoint of the tooth row. When the
two premaxillae are articulated, the lingual wall can be seen ventral to
the labial wall in lateral view and both slope obliquely and laterally.
The relationship between this orientation of the alveolar groove and the
teeth can be seen in NHMUK PV R3893: the tooth bases abut the labial
wall, but the sides lie against the lingual wall. This causes the teeth
to lie at approximately 45° to the vertical, deflected laterally, but
because of their strong lingual curvature (see
[\[OicenicusDentition\]](#OicenicusDentition){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusDentition"}), the crowns are angled at only 20° to
the vertical. The anteriormost teeth are oriented more vertically. At
the contact with the maxilla, the floor of the alveolar groove slopes
posterodorsally to receive the anterior portion of this bone. Although
the tooth placements are poorly defined, it is estimated that the
premaxillae each bore at least 27 teeth.

lllS Element & Measurement & Specimen & Length\
Skull & Anteroposterior length of largest specimen & NHMUK PV R3013 &
1050\
Premaxilla & Anteroposterior length & NHMUK PV R3893 & 585\
Maxilla & Anteroposterior length & GLAHM V1921 & 292\
Orbit & Greatest diameter & NHMUK PV R3013 & 280\
Quadrate & Dorsoventral height & NHMUK PV R2133 & 144\
& & NHMUK PV R4753 & 137.5\
& Lateral condyle width & NHMUK PV R4753 & 57.7\
Exoccipital & Anteroposterior length of foot & NHMUK PV R4522 & 41.8\
& Dorsoventral height & NHMUK PV R4522 & 34.75\
Stapes & Lateral width & NHMUK PV R4522 & 70.4\
& & NHMUK PV R2133 & 75\
& & LEICT 100'1949/45 & 76.7\
& Dorsoventral diameter of head & NHMUK PV R4522 & 52.7\
& & NHMUK PV R2133 & 55.4\
& & LEICT 100'1949/45 & 60.3\
Mandible & Anteroposterior length of largest specimen & NHMUK PV R3013 &
1000\
Dentary & Anteroposterior length & GLAHM V1921 & 865\

\

[\[OicenicusMaxilla\]]{#OicenicusMaxilla label="OicenicusMaxilla"}

The maxilla has a complex triangular shape in lateral view but is
largely obscured by the posterior projections of the premaxilla that
surround it laterally and medially
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Oicenicus-palate,tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements,pl1\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Oicenicus-palate,tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements,pl1){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Oicenicus-palate,tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements,pl1"},
figs 1--3). Dorsally, it is seen as long and narrow as it continues the
alveolar groove posterior to the premaxilla. The anterior process slots
between the posterior projections of the premaxilla and so has a sloping
and tapering anterior process that forms the dorsal floor of the
alveolar groove and contacts the premaxilla on the dorsal and lateral
sides. An elongate facet on the lateral side of this process, which
extends more than one-quarter of the length of the maxilla, shows the
extent of contact with the subnarial process of the premaxilla. The
lateral face of the maxilla is composed of the external lateral wall of
the alveolar groove ventrally, but is extended dorsally into a low
triangular flange, which has an undulating anterior slope and straight,
roughened posterior slope. At the anterior end of this, a small process
is developed, concordant with the dorsal edge of the premaxillary facet
ventrally, that forms the anterior extent of the simple nasal facet; its
delicate nature means this process is infrequently preserved, so its
full extent is uncertain, but this process likely supported the soft
tissues. Posterior to the nasal facet, the dorsal margin of the bone is
smoothed and rounded following the contours of the external naris, and
showing the extent of the participation of the maxilla, although this
would have been obscured laterally by the premaxilla and lachrymal in
life. The posterior two-thirds of the lateral face of this triangular
flange is roughened and ridged showing the great extent of the lachrymal
contact. The dorsal edge here develops several posteriorly directed
peaks that are largely concealed by the overlapping lachrymal. The
posteriormost of these receives the distal tip of the prefrontal
laterally. This coverage by the lachrymal differs from Andrews'
[-@Andrews1910] description: he limited this to a smaller, posterior
portion of the dorsal process and thus allowed the maxilla to contact
the external naris in his lateral view reconstruction (fig. 23). The
extent of roughening on the lateral surface however supports significant
coverage by the lachrymal. The dorsal peak of the maxilla would be
located near a similar peak in the lachrymal in life and these may have
supported the soft tissues of the nasal capsule. Ventral to the
lachrymal facet, the jugal facet is shown by a series of high
longitudinal ridges that extend along much of the posterior half of the
ventral lateral face. The posterior process of the maxilla tapers
posteriorly along this contact.

Internal to the lateral triangular process, a projecting flange forms
the floor of the alveolar groove that is deflected upwards medially as
it contributes to the palatal surface. The anterior portion of this
flange forms the floor of the nasal capsule and shows numerous foramina
in this region. Further foramina penetrate through the floor of the
alveolar groove, and can be seen in ventral view. These maxillary
foramina probably transmitted branches of the inferior orbital artery,
the infraorbital nerve, and the palatal nerve. Contact with the vomers
is made on the anteromedial surface via a shallow longitudinal groove
along the ventral deflection of the medial flange. Posterior to this,
several posteroventrally-deflected tongues of bone are developed that
interlock with the palatine. The posteriormost of these forms the
anterior apex of the subtemporal fenestra. The alveolar groove continues
along much of the length of the maxilla. At its anterior end, the
maxillary contribution is shallow, but the lateral and medial walls
rapidly gain in height. The groove gradually narrows posteriorly through
much of the length of the maxilla, but begins to taper and shallows
rapidly alongside the jugal facet. @Andrews1910 did not consider the
maxilla to be tooth-bearing, but various isolated and articulated
specimens (e.g.  NHMUK PV R3893) show embedded tooth fragments, or
depressions indicating their position, along the whole of the alveolar
groove. The maxillary alveolar groove held teeth more posteriorly than
shown by @Kirton1983 [fig. 9]: GLAHM V1921 bears impressions posteriorly
to the posteriormost point of the alveolar groove. The teeth became
smaller posteriorly as the groove narrowed, shown by the diminishing
size of the impressions.

[\[OicenicusNasal\]]{#OicenicusNasal label="OicenicusNasal"}

The nasals are elongate, triangular bones that form a major part of the
posterior rostrum and anterior skull roof
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof,pl1\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof,pl1){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof,pl1"},
figs 4, 5). The anterior processes extend anteriorly for much of the
rostral length, but as they lie in a medial groove of the premaxilla
(see
[\[OicenicusPremaxilla\]](#OicenicusPremaxilla){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusPremaxilla"}), are obscured from dorsal view by the
dorsal wall of this groove. Along their midline, the two nasals meet at
a simple, rounded butt joint. From their anteriormost dorsal exposure,
the nasals separate the posterolateral processes of the two premaxillae.
The dorsolateral wall of the nasal widens and falls ventrally, meeting
the maxilla just anterior to the external naris, posterior to half the
length of the nasal, in a thickened and roughened facet. Just lateral to
the midline, each nasal shows a strong, convex, longitudinal curvature
separating the external surface into dorsally and laterally directed
faces. This continues the squared cross section of the dorsal rostrum
posterior to the premaxillary portion and is particularly strong dorsal
to the external naris, where the curvature is raised dorsal to the level
of the midline. The elongate depression formed between these ridges was
termed the *excavatio internasalis* by @Maisch1997e. There is no
evidence for an internasal foramen. The function of this depression is
uncertain; @Wade1984 suggested it may be the locus for an organ for
echolocation, similar to the melon in cetaceans. @Maisch2000c disputed
this as the structure of the otic capsule bears little resemblance to
that in Cetacea, and the *excavatio internasalis* is much smaller,
suggesting an olfactory function instead. The posterior dorsal surface
is largely flattened and dorsally deflected, giving the skull roof a
distinct curve dorsal to and around the large orbit. As an internasal
foramen is not present in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, nor other
ichthyosaur taxa that have an *excavatio internasalis*, an olfactory
function is also unlikely. The strong dorsal inflection of the skull
around the orbit would have been a region that experienced forces from
several directions, such as the drag forces from forward swimming and
the compressive forces on the snout during biting, requiring
strengthening at this point of the snout. Additionally, to increase the
streamlining of the skull about the external naris and orbit, the dorsal
nasal bone may have been fluted, and the *excavatio internasalis* may
have been fat-filled to reduce the angular displacement caused by the
orbit. Posteriorly, the nasal overlaps the frontal dorsally and
postfrontal laterally respectively in an interdigitating suture, the
nasal plate thinning in this region. The ventral margin abuts the
prefrontal posterior to its participation in the external narial
opening, excluding the nasal from external contact with the lachrymal.
Evidence from NHMUK PV R4758 suggests that the lachrymal does not
contact the ventral margin of the nasal but is excluded by the narial
process of the prefrontal [@Kirton1983]. The facet identified as the
lachrymal facet by @Andrews1910 may be the posterior portion of the
lateral flared edge (see below), which is frequently damaged. Ventrally,
the nasal is concave with a low and wide groove along much of the
anterior process, extending and tapering until medial to the external
naris. The external naris opens into a low, posteriorly oriented
channel. Posterior to this, the extensive contact with the frontal
covers much of the remaining surface.

The ventral border of the nasal, just posterior to its midpoint, forms
much of the dorsal border of the external naris. This border has two
parts: the anterior is a short, smooth, and thin vertical edge. Behind
this is a smooth, straight, horizontal margin that, posteriorly, is
projected laterally into a flared edge, which curves ventrally towards
the posterior of the external narial opening, forming a funnel, as noted
by @Andrews1910. This lateral expansion is rarely completely preserved;
it was probably formed from very thin bone in life. A small spur of bone
is sometimes developed just internal to the narial opening that is
visible in lateral view, between the two portions of the border.
Posterior to the lateral expansion, there may also be a small notch, as
is developed in GLAHM V1129 and to a lesser extent in NHMUK PV R4753. In
specimens where this notch is not seen, the external bone is pierced by
one or more foramina (e.g.  PETMG R47). These structures likely indicate
the passage of vessels for the soft tissues of the nasal capsule. The
bony structures of the maxilla, lachrymal, and nasal do not permit
reconstruction of these tissues, but suggest the presence of muscular
structures that may be associated with a valvular mechanism
[@Parsons1970; @Kirton1983; @Maisch2000c].

[\[OicenicusLachrymal\]]{#OicenicusLachrymal label="OicenicusLachrymal"}

This thin plate of bone is positioned lateral to the maxilla, covering
much of its lateral surface
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,pl1\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,pl1){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,pl1"}, figs 4, 5). The lachrymal has
a triangular shape, extending in three directions: anterior, dorsal, and
posteroventral. Its anterior portion forms the ventral and posterior
margin of the external naris with its smooth and rounded dorsal border.
This is largely horizontal, but a low prominence is developed towards
the posterior part of the margin, and just posterior to the dorsal tip
of the maxilla, which can be seen interior to the lachrymal in lateral
view. The anteriormost tip of the lachrymal has a small contact with the
premaxilla on its ventral edge. Laterally, its face is largely smooth,
but develops a crescentic ridge that follows the orbital border on its
posterior margin. Anteriorly, this is perforated by numerous nutritive
foramina. The ridge is continued around the orbit dorsally by the
prefrontal, postfrontal and postorbital leading @Kirton1983 to suggest
that it supported a thickened dermis that protected the eye. The dorsal
process contacts the narial process of the prefrontal at its apex in an
interdigitating suture, excluding contact with the nasal ([@Kirton1983];
*contra* [@Andrews1910]). The narial process of the prefrontal extends
ventrally to cover much of the medial face of the lachrymal.
Posteroventrally, the lachrymal is drawn out into a long process that
follows the dorsal edge of the maxilla. This process becomes wider
posteriorly and develops a ventral groove that contacts the jugal. In
this region, the lachrymal, maxilla, and jugal together form the
anteroventral margin of the orbit. Medially, longitudinally directed low
ridges that form the contact with the maxilla largely cover the face of
the lachrymal.

[\[OicenicusExternalnaris\]]{#OicenicusExternalnaris
label="OicenicusExternalnaris"}

The external naris is bordered by the maxilla, lachrymal and nasal in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* with its form described above
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor"}). Additionally, it is located
laterally on the skull of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, reflecting the
square cross section of the jaws and strong dorsolateral curvature of
the nasals (see
[\[OicenicusNasal\]](#OicenicusNasal){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusNasal"}), so little of the naris is visible in
dorsal view.

[\[OicenicusPrefrontal\]]{#OicenicusPrefrontal
label="OicenicusPrefrontal"}

The prefrontal has little exposure on the skull roof, which belies its
complex form
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof,pl2\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof,pl2){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof,pl2"},
figs 1, 2). It is composed of a dorsal sheet and an anteroventrally
directed strut that forms the anterodorsal margin of the orbit. The
anterior portion of this rounded strut contacts the lachrymal at the
posterodorsal margin of the external naris in a strong interlocking
facet, underlapping its medial surface on much of the dorsal process and
extending to contact the maxilla distally. This extensive contact acted
as a strong columnar support between the external naris and orbit,
resisting strong compressive forces generated during feeding
[@Kirton1983]. The strut thickens dorsally and gently curves
posterodorsally around the orbit. Towards the main body of the bone,
this strut widens, forming lateral and medial flanges that merge into
the expanded dorsal sheet. The lateral flange is the smaller and is
exposed in dorsal view; this forms part of the supraorbital ridge that
can be seen around much of the orbit (see
[\[OicenicusOrbitalfenestra\]](#OicenicusOrbitalfenestra){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusOrbitalfenestra"}), and links those on the lachrymal
anteriorly and postfrontal posteriorly. The medial flange is slightly
larger and is ridged dorsally. It contacts the nasal and the frontal
ventrally. Along the main axis of the dorsal surface of the prefrontal
is a parabolic ridge that meets a deep groove in the lateral margin of
the overlapping nasal. The posterior part of the prefrontal is covered
by the postfrontal dorsally and overlaps a small part of the parietal
posteromedially. Here the prefrontal tapers posteriorly beneath the
frontal and postfrontal contacting the anteromedial apex of the
supratemporal fenestra and the parietal. Ventrally, between the dorsal
sheet and the medial side of the central strut, the prefrontal takes
part in a rounded depression that is continued by the ventral surfaces
of the frontal and parietal. @Kirton1983 suggested that this feature
marks the location of the olfactory lobes of the brain.

[\[OicenicusFrontal\]]{#OicenicusFrontal label="OicenicusFrontal"}

These are small bones of the skull roof, with a correspondingly small
exposure dorsally
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof"}).
The frontals are surrounded by the nasals, postfrontals, and parietals;
anteriorly, laterally, and posteriorly, respectively. Contacts
superficially appear to be interdigitating sutures, belying the
extensive overlap of the bones in this region. This covering, and the
delicacy of the bone, makes description problematic as the frontal is
often preserved in articulation and so is poorly visible, hence Andrews'
[-@Andrews1910] trifling description. The exposed dorsal surface is
largely flat, but is pitted by numerous foramina that @Kirton1983
interpreted as indicating close application of the dermis. Medially, the
frontals meet in a straight suture that is broadened dorsoventrally by a
ventral deflection of the ventral surface, possibly providing a large
surface for bonding by connective tissue [@Kirton1983]. The ventral
ridge formed by this ventral deflection marks the medial border between
two interior depressions on the ventral skull roof, indication the
extent of the telencephalon, which is continued from the prefrontal
([\[OicenicusPrefrontal,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof\]](#OicenicusPrefrontal,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusPrefrontal,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof"}). At the
posterior end of the medial suture, the frontals enclose almost the
entirety of the pineal foramen in dorsal view, the parietals forming
only the posteriormost portion of its margin. The pineal foramen is
ovoid, pinched at the anterior and posterior, and the frontals are
smoothed around the margins. Anteriorly, the nasal overlaps the frontal
extensively, so the latter's surface is ridged and grooved in this
region.

Ventrally, the frontal is dominated by the depression accommodating the
dorsal structures of the brain [@Kirton1983] that are continuous with
those of the nasal anteriorly, prefrontal laterally, and parietal
posteriorly. The medial flange of the prefrontal underlaps the frontal
laterally; this is obscured from dorsal view by the overlapping nasal
and postfrontal. A small contact is made with the postfrontal by
interlocking tongues at the posterolateral extent of the frontal. The
posterior portion of the ventral surface of the frontal is ridged and
contacts the underlapping parietal. The contact between the parietal and
postfrontal excludes the frontal from the margin of the supratemporal
fenestra dorsally, while the posterior extent of the prefrontal-parietal
contact excludes the frontal ventrally.

[\[OicenicusParietal\]]{#OicenicusParietal label="OicenicusParietal"}

These paired bones form the posteromedial portion of the skull roof and
much of the medial border of the supratemporal fenestra
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof,pl3\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof,pl3){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof,pl3"}).
The parietal has a generally crescentic shape, with a large anterior
main body and a robust posterolateral process. The anterior region of
the parietal is overlapped by the frontal giving an interdigitating
suture line with ridges and grooves on the dorsal surface. The two
parietals meet medially along much of their midline, although their
anteriormost sections rapidly diverge around the pineal foramen and
under the frontals. The medial suture between the parietals is straight
and dorsoventrally thickened, with complex grooves along its medial
surface. Lateral to this, much of the dorsal surface of the parietal is
largely convex, with the lateral edge curving ventral to form the smooth
medial wall of the supratemporal fenestra. Posteriorly, there is a small
rise towards the posterolateral process and there, medial to the
processes themselves, the parietal forms a small shelf, under which the
supraoccipital fits. The posterolateral process descends laterally along
its length to underlie the supratemporal. At its midpoint, the lateral
wall of the parietal is drawn ventrally into a pointed descending
process that may have contacted the epipterygoid, as occurs in
*Ichthyosaurus* [@McGowan1973; @Kirton1983]. It is likely that the
epipterygoid was not ossified in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* (see
[\[OicenicusEpipterygoid\]](#OicenicusEpipterygoid){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusEpipterygoid"}). @Andrews1910 interpreted a deeply
grooved region just anterior to this process as the facet for the
epipterygoid (*columella cranii*). @Kirton1983, however, suggested this
was instead a point of muscle attachment (*M. levator pterygoidei?*),
when compared with *Ichthyosaurus*. This groove is more likely the facet
for the epipterygoid, which, although unlikely to be ossified
([\[OicenicusEpipterygoid\]](#OicenicusEpipterygoid){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusEpipterygoid"}), may have remained in cartilaginous
form, as has been argued for *Platypterygius australis* [@Kear2005a
599]. The groove also corresponds to the epipterygoid facet described by
@McGowan1973 [26].

Like the frontal, the ventral surface of the parietal shows evidence of
moulding to accommodate the underlying structures of the brain.
Laterally, the anterior parietal continues the longitudinal depression
found on the frontal and prefrontal that @Kirton1983 interpreted as the
impression of the olfactory lobe (see
[\[OicenicusPrefrontal,OicenicusFrontal\]](#OicenicusPrefrontal,OicenicusFrontal){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusPrefrontal,OicenicusFrontal"}). Posteriorly, and
more medially, a further faint depression may house the cerebral
hemisphere [@McGowan1973; @Kirton1983]. These anterior depressions are
marked by faint striae. The posterior extent of these depressions is
marked by a transverse ridge ["tentorial ridge" of @Andrews1910
fig. 14]. Posterior to this is a large rounded depression that is
bounded anteriorly by the transverse ridge and the descending process
laterally. The surface here is irregular and marked by numerous striae
that radiate from the centre of the depression. Kirton ([-@Kirton1983];
after [@McGowan1973]) interpreted this depression as the location of the
optic lobe of the mesencephalon. The ventral surface of the
posterolateral process is concave, bordered by an anterior ridge, which
marks the posteromedial wall of the supratemporal fenestra, and a
posterior ridge that marks the parietal shelf. This latter may be
grooved to accommodate the dorsal ridge of the underlying supraoccipital
(see
[\[OicenicusSupraoccipital\]](#OicenicusSupraoccipital){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusSupraoccipital"}), although a significant amount of
cartilage may have intervened as the supraoccipital is positioned
ventral to the parietal. The ventral surface forms the roof of a narrow
opening equivalent to the posttemporal fenestra of primitive tetrapods,
between the parietal dorsally, the supraoccipital posteroventrally, and
the squamosal laterally [@Evans2008].

The position of the parietal means that numerous bones surround it.
Anteriorly, the frontal overlaps by interlocking suture, as seen in
dorsal view
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof"}).
The anterolateral margin of the parietal contacts the prefrontal and
postfrontal bones. The prefrontal slots between two laminae of the
parietal in its anterolateral corner
([\[fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof\]](#fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof"}). The ventral lamina is
drawn into a long delicate process that runs along the orbital ridge of
the ventral surface of the prefrontal
([\[fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof\]](#fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof"}), which is often broken.
Contact with the postfrontal is smaller: the parietal has a small facet
on its dorsal surface onto which the postfrontal abuts; this is obscured
by the overlying frontal. The posterolateral process of the parietal
meets and underlaps the supratemporal in a series of well-developed
ridges and grooves that strengthen this contact.

[\[OicenicusPostfrontal\]]{#OicenicusPostfrontal
label="OicenicusPostfrontal"}

This curved and thickened bone forms the anterolateral border of the
supratemporal fenestra, the lateral portion of the skull roof and the
dorsal wall of the orbit
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof,pl2\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof,pl2){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof,pl2"},
figs 3, 4). The postfrontal is [L]{.sans-serif}-shaped in dorsal view,
with a wide anterior plate that grades into a more mediolaterally facing
posterior strut. A small area of the anterior postfrontal is grooved,
marking the extent of interdigitation with the nasal anteriorly and
frontal anteromedially. @Appleby1956 noted that the postfrontal overlaps
all other bones in its anterior region. Posteriorly, the dorsal surface
is largely smooth. The medial border is rounded and roughened, with
numerous nutritive foramina, which @Kirton1983 suggested might have been
the origin of part of the *M. adductor mandibulae externus*. Lateral to
this, the postfrontal slopes downwards towards the lateral margin of the
skull; the whole bone tapers in this direction. Both @Andrews1910 and
@Appleby1956 commented on the thinness of the lateral flange.

Ventrally, the anterior part of the postfrontal overlies the prefrontal
for much of its area via a strongly grooved contact. A small
anteromedial facet receives and overlaps the parietal. Posterior to this
area, the ventral surface is raised into a longitudinal ridge that marks
the dorsal rim of the orbit, continued from the prefrontal anteriorly
towards the postorbital posteriorly. This ridge is positioned towards
the medial edge of the postfrontal, so that there is a steep slope up
towards the supratemporal fenestra medially and a gentler, concave curve
that marks the lateral flange of the postfrontal. The lateral flange is
the dorsal portion of the supraorbital crest (see
[\[OicenicusOrbitalfenestra\]](#OicenicusOrbitalfenestra){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusOrbitalfenestra"}). The posterior portion of the
postfrontal is greatly overlapped by the supratemporal. An elongate
groove extends along about one-half the length of medial margin of the
postfrontal, into which a long medial tongue of bone from the
supratemporal slots. The posterior edge of the postfrontal itself
develops two blunt tongues, dorsally and ventrally. The former overlaps
the lateral face of the supratemporal and the latter meets the
postorbital in a slot. A groove on the posterolateral edge of the
postfrontal receives a tongue of bone from the postorbital.

[\[OicenicusSupratemporal\]]{#OicenicusSupratemporal
label="OicenicusSupratemporal"}

The triradiate supratemporal forms the posterolateral margin of both the
supratemporal fenestra and the skull roof as a whole
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,pl2\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,pl2){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,pl2"},
figs 5--8). The main body is located at the posterolateral corner of the
cranium and its three rami are directed anteriorly, along the lateral
skull roof, medially, along the posterodorsal margin of the skull, and
ventrally, medial to the quadrate. The anterior and ventral rami consist
of thin sheets of bone that are often broken, but NHMUK PV R2146
preserves much of the supratemporal. Much of the lateral wall of the
supratemporal fenestra is formed by the anterior ramus, which has a
rounded dorsal margin and narrows anteriorly to contact the postfrontal.
The dorsal part of this ramus is a thick and rounded bar. There is a
deep groove dorsolaterally with which a ventral groove on the
postfrontal interlocks (see
[\[OicenicusPostfrontal\]](#OicenicusPostfrontal){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusPostfrontal"}) strengthening this point of the
supratemporal fenestra [@Kirton1983]. Ventral to the bar, the anterior
ramus develops a broad but thin sheet, deepening posteriorly, against
which the squamosal superficially lies laterally, marked dorsally by a
shallow groove. The squamosal also meets a facet at the posteroventral
margin, and the supratemporal is thickened and roughened for this
contact. On its medial face, the anterior ramus of the supratemporal is
roughened dorsally for muscle attachment; @Kirton1983 suggested that the
*M. adductor mandibulae externus* would have attached along most of the
lateral supratemporal fenestra. The ventral margin of the supratemporal
is underlapped by the postorbital anterior to its contact with the
squamosal and is also roughened.

The medial ramus is triangular in shape and consists of a thickened bar
that rises anteromedially. A large, concave, triangular or "somewhat
diamond-shaped" [@Andrews1910 16] facet at its medial end is the main
contact with the parietal, and is strongly grooved. On the ventral
surface of this ramus, there are two deep grooves that receive
particularly prominent ridges from the parietal. The supratemporal
overlaps the lateral process of the parietal anterodorsally, tapering
anteriorly along this process. This anterior orientation creates a
noticeably acute angle at the posterolateral corner of the supratemporal
fenestra between the anterior and medial rami. Externally, the surface
of the anterior and medial rami have striations that meet at the
posterolateral corner of the bone in a roughened area. On the dorsal
part of the posterior surface of the supratemporal, there is a small
horizontal, triangular shelf that becomes deeper medially and may be
grooved dorsally (e.g.  NHMUK PV R2146). Ventrally to this, there is a
small depression that marks the facet for the paroccipital process of
the opisthotic. @Appleby1956 [p. 413], however, suggested this process
articulated more medially at the apex between the medial and ventral
rami. This paroccipital process of the opisthotic is received between
the ventral surface of the horizontal shelf and the main bone, but is
poorly developed except in the most well-ossified specimens (e.g.  NHMUK
PV R2133, R4753). In these cases it can be seen to comprise two separate
facets: one on the ventral surface of the shelf and a smaller facet on
the main body of the supratemporal. There is a prominent tubercle in the
middle of the posterior face that @Kirton1983 suggested is flanked by a
smaller tubercle; the material available does not permit confirmation of
this. The bone here is marked by radiating striae that likely are an
attachment point for the *M. depressor mandibulae*.

The ventral ramus of the supratemporal is formed by two laminae,
laterally and medially, that wrap around and flank the dorsal and medial
borders of the quadrate. Dorsally, the quadrate is covered by the short,
lateral lamina in a deep ventral groove between this and the medial
ramus that was largely filled by the cartilage capping the dorsal edge
of the quadrate. A small notch on the lateral edge of the ventral ramus
exposed the dorsal edge of the quadrate. The medial lamina is the larger
of the two laminae and descends for almost half of the dorsoventral
height of the quadrate, along its pterygoid lamella, and envelops its
anterior edge and the dorsal edge of the pterygoid. NHMUK PV R2133 shows
a split for passage of a blood vessel to the quadrate ventrally
[@Kirton1983]. At its ventral extent the ventral ramus of the
supratemporal intervenes between the pterygoid and stapes, overlapping
the dorsal edge of the former and developing a small facet for the
latter. Tubercles on the anterior face may mark the origin of the
*M. adductor mandibulae externus* [@Kirton1983].

Reconstruction of the occipital region of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* has
varied between those of @Andrews1910 [fig. 4], @Appleby1956 [fig. 21],
and @Kirton1983 [fig. 6]. In particular, the amount of interosseous
cartilage present between elements. The heavily pitted articular
surfaces of basisphenoid, basioccipital, and those elements that contact
these suggest that cartilage was present between these elements (see
[\[OicenicusBasioccipital,OicenicusParabasisphenoid,OicenicusExoccipital,OicenicusOpisthotic,OicenicusProotic,OicenicusStapes\]](#OicenicusBasioccipital,OicenicusParabasisphenoid,OicenicusExoccipital,OicenicusOpisthotic,OicenicusProotic,OicenicusStapes){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusBasioccipital,OicenicusParabasisphenoid,OicenicusExoccipital,OicenicusOpisthotic,OicenicusProotic,OicenicusStapes"}).
In more complete specimens (e.g.  GLAHM V1901, V1921; NHMUK PV R2133,
2161), it is possible to re-articulate the posterior cranial elements.
The elements surrounding the otic capsule do not fit closely by virtue
of the need to encompass the osseous labyrinth, and the angular
displacement between the supraoccipital, exoccipital, and opisthotic
that permits this. Further, the articulation between the parietal and
supratemporal laterally broadens the occipital region in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* beyond that reconstructed by @Andrews1910
[fig. 4 @Appleby1956 fig. 21]. This separates the supratemporal and
quadrate further, which increases the lateral space around the
opisthotic and stapes
([\[fig:Oicenicus-occipital\]](#fig:Oicenicus-occipital){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-occipital"}). The variability in the
ossification of posterior skull elements
(e.g. [\[OicenicusQuadrate,OicenicusParabasisphenoid,OicenicusBasioccipital\]](#OicenicusQuadrate,OicenicusParabasisphenoid,OicenicusBasioccipital){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusQuadrate,OicenicusParabasisphenoid,OicenicusBasioccipital"})
suggests that these elements may have formed closer contact later in
ontogeny. It is possible that this delayed ossification in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* is retained as a paedomorphic character. No
specimens show direct contact between these elements.

[\[OicenicusSquamosal\]]{#OicenicusSquamosal label="OicenicusSquamosal"}

The triangular squamosal has been a problematic element due to its
delicacy and its superficial placement on the dorsolateral portion of
the skull
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,pl04\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,pl04){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,pl04"}, figs 1, 2). The squamosal
is occasionally not preserved in ichthyosaur specimens, but has since
been demonstrated to be present in most taxa
[@Maisch2001; @McGowan2003]. Moreover, descriptions are few and
incomplete [e.g. @Andrews1910 p. 18]. The squamosal is oriented with a
horizontal dorsal margin and the longest edge situated anteroventrally,
and has a noticeable externally convex curvature that fits around the
underlying cheek bones. The anterodorsal portion is strongly grooved
where it is overlapped anteriorly by the postfrontal. Ventrally, the
curved facet for the overlapping postorbital is developed; this bone
covers about half of the anteroventral surface of the lateral squamosal.
This area is roughened for this contact and features low ridges and
grooves. At the ventral corner, there is a strongly developed facet for
the quadratojugal, which overlaps about one-third of the dorsoventral
height of the squamosal. This is marked by a curved ridge surrounding
the facet and a vertical ridge within the area of contact that
corresponds to a groove on the quadratojugal. A narrow posteroventral
tongue descends and intervenes between the postorbital and
quadratojugal, extending along the posterior edge of the former.
Medially, the squamosal contacts the supratemporal dorsally and
postorbital ventrally and is smoothed for this contact. The dorsal
margin is slightly thickened and complexly shaped to fit into the dorsal
groove on the underlying supratemporal. At the posterodorsal corner, a
posteromedially-directed, triangular facet, which extends along the
dorsal quarter of the posterior margin, articulates with the quadrate.
The external surface of the squamosal is confluent with this facet, but
internally, its surface is deflected medially to accommodate the
quadrate facet. The posterior margin ventral to the facet is raised into
a ridge that becomes more pronounced ventrally.

[\[OicenicusPostorbital\]]{#OicenicusPostorbital
label="OicenicusPostorbital"}

The postorbital is a narrow, crescentic element that forms much of the
posterior margin of the orbit and the external surface of the cheek
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,pl04\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,pl04){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,pl04"}, figs 3, 4). The
anterodorsal portion is developed into a wide transverse flange that
continues the supraorbital crest from the postfrontal anteriorly.
Anteriorly, the distal tip forms a tongue-and-groove contact between the
postorbital and postfrontal. This flange is smoothed externally on the
rim of the orbit, narrowing posteroventrally, until the orbital rim is
continued by the main body of the bone. Posterior to this flange is a
broad, medially positioned lamella that extends the dorsal half of the
postorbital and gives it a squared outline. This lamella is slightly
roughened on its lateral surface extending onto a small portion of the
supraorbital crest, and has a slightly irregular margin. The squamosal
twists medially and posteriorly to overlap most of the posterodorsal
lamella. Dorsally the postorbital contacts the supratemporal. Ventrally,
the postorbital is flatter, although still convex laterally. The
anterior margin has a strong, but obtusely angled curvature ventrally to
the reduction of the supraorbital crest that corresponds to a heel on
the posterior margin. This heel is very irregular, with low ridges on
the external surface. Andrews' [-@Andrews1910 fig. 9 C] description of
this element is brief and he neither describes nor figures this notable
change in orientation of the postorbital, nor the heel formed. The
ventral portion of the postorbital tapers slightly distally, but ends in
an irregular ventral margin overlying the jugal.

Medially, the postorbital is largely flattened and slightly roughened on
the posterodorsal lamella where it contacts the lateral face of the
anterior ramus of the supratemporal. The anterior surface of the
supraorbital rim is concave, with the rim itself located medially. The
posterior margin of the posterodorsal lamella develops a low ridge,
directed anteroventrally, that crosses much of the ventral portion of
the postorbital. This marks the anterior extent of the contact with the
underlying quadratojugal. The contact has low ridges and grooves that
extend to the heel of the postorbital and form the marginal
irregularities described above. Anteroventrally, the ridge heightens and
a ventral groove accepts the jugal ventral to the roof formed by the
concave postorbital. Where this is broken (e.g.  NHMUK PV R3893), the
curved facet can be seen that corresponds to the curved dorsal process
of the jugal. The medial surface of the postorbital is also roughened
and low-ridged, and has an irregular ventral margin as the jugal is not
completely overlapped.

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: right quadratojugal
(NHMUK PV R4753) in lateral (**a**) and medial (**b**) views.
Abbreviations: **fj**, jugal facet; **fpo**, postorbital facet; **fq**,
quadrate facet; **fsq**, squamosal facet; **li**, attachment point of
ligaments binding quadrate to quadratojugal. Scale bar represents 50 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-quadratojugal\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-quadratojugal
label="fig:Oicenicus-quadratojugal"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-quadratojugal.png "fig:"){#fig:Oicenicus-quadratojugal}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-qjlat\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-qjlat
label="fig:Oicenicus-qjlat"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-qjmed\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-qjmed
label="fig:Oicenicus-qjmed"}

[\[OicenicusQuadratojugal\]]{#OicenicusQuadratojugal
label="OicenicusQuadratojugal"}

The small and thin quadratojugal is a triangular element that forms the
posteroventral corner of the lateral skull and cheek region, but is not
well-exposed in either view, as it is the most medial element in this
region
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Oicenicus-quadratojugal\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Oicenicus-quadratojugal){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Oicenicus-quadratojugal"}).
@Kirton1983 noted that the quadratojugal figured by @Andrews1910
[fig. 10] was more triangular than those she figured [@Kirton1983
fig. 4]. Kirton interpreted this as a proportional elongation of the
quadratojugal through ontogeny (compare NHMUK PV R2180, R4522 and
R4753). Larger specimens of quadratojugals in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
are more dorsoventrally elongate than in smaller specimens. Kirton's
explanation is likely as there would have been extensive growth and
remodelling around the quadrate and articular region during ontogeny,
which would have affected the growth of the cheek. Much of the anterior
lateral surface is roughened where this contacts the medial surfaces of
the overlying postorbital dorsally and jugal ventrally. The posterior
and ventral margins of the quadratojugal are ridged and mark the
boundary of these contacts. The descending tongue of the squamosal runs
along most of the posterior part of the lateral surface in a prominent
groove, which then ends in a roughened facet for the heel of the
postorbital. On the ventral margin, the ridge is slightly undercut
dorsally where the dorsal process of the jugal slots into it. The medial
surface of the quadratojugal is mostly smooth anteriorly. Its posterior
margin is distinctly ridged and, at half of the height of the
quadratojugal, the bone projects medially to form a small cup-like facet
that is flush with the posteroventral margin and oriented slightly
medially. This is where the quadrate articulates, and just dorsal to the
facet there is a small triangular depression that @Kirton1983
interpreted as the attachment point for the ligaments that bind these
two bones.

[\[OicenicusJugal\]]{#OicenicusJugal label="OicenicusJugal"}

The jugal has an overall bowed [J]{.sans-serif}-shape formed by a long
suborbital bar and a posteriorly ascending process
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Oicenicus-palate,pl04\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Oicenicus-palate,pl04){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Oicenicus-palate,pl04"}, figs 5,
6). Anteriorly, the jugal bar overlaps the lateral face of the maxilla,
lateral to the external wall of the alveolar groove, with low ridges to
accommodate this contact. The anteriormost portion is splayed wide over
the maxilla and bounded dorsally by the posteroventral process of the
lachrymal, which accommodates the dorsal surface of the jugal in its
ventral groove (see
[\[OicenicusLachrymal\]](#OicenicusLachrymal){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusLachrymal"}). In this region, the jugal is flattened
laterally, but widens posteriorly to a sub-circular cross section by the
midpoint of the orbit. The ventral portion has a longitudinal groove
that tapers posteriorly, erroneously labelled "facet for maxilla" by
@Andrews1910 [fig. 10], giving the area posterior to this the appearance
of a strut that is directed and broadens posteroventrally, meeting the
ventral margin of the postorbital just anterior to the heel. The jugal
bar is bowed both laterally and ventrally to create space for the jaw
muscles that pass medially through the subtemporal fenestra, and to
house the sclerotic ring. The posterior part of the jugal ascends
dorsally as a flattened process that forms the posterior part of the
orbit and part of the cheek region. This process is enclosed on its
anterolateral surface by the postorbital, the contact for which is
marked by dorsoventrally-oriented ridges on the external surface of the
jugal. The dorsal tip of this process is rounded. Posteroventrally, the
jugal spreads slightly to form a ventral heel that is often roughened,
and was interpreted by @Kirton1983 as the attachment site of a ligament.
This is most likely point of attachment for the jugomandibular ligament
that extends from the posteroventral jugal heel to the lateral part of
the articular region of the mandible [@Herrel1998; @Evans2008].

The medial surface of the jugal bar is more flattened than the lateral
surface. The anterior portion is ridged longitudinally, matching the
contact on the maxilla. The dorsal surface also has undulating ridges in
some specimens (e.g.  GLAHM V1921). Medially, the surface of the dorsal
process contacts the quadratojugal, showing a slight ridge around the
area of contact along the dorsal portion. Running dorsoventrally along
the contact, the jugal has a low ridge that slots into a small groove on
the lateral surface of the quadratojugal. The posterior margins of the
jugal and quadratojugal here form a continuous straight line along the
posterior of the cheek. The dorsal process gently narrows dorsally, with
the anterior and posterior borders forming low undulations, especially
where they are covered laterally and medially.

[\[OicenicusOrbitalfenestra\]]{#OicenicusOrbitalfenestra
label="OicenicusOrbitalfenestra"}

The orbit and sclerotic ring of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* is,
relatively and absolutely, one of the largest in nature
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat"}). @McGowan1976 [676] defined the
orbital ratio as the ratio of orbital diameter to jaw length. For NHMUK
PV R3013 this is approximately 280 mm/1000 mm = 0.28
([\[tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements\]](#tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements"}). Indeed, a large orbit is
found often in Ichthyosauria, particularly Mixosauridae and
Thunnosauria. Unlike the supratemporal fenestra, the configuration of
the bones that make up the orbit remain consistent in ichthyosaurs. In
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, the prefrontal, postfrontal, and jugal --
forming the dorsal and ventral margins of the orbit -- are angled
obliquely anteriorly to the anteroposterior axis of the skull so that
the orbit faces slightly anteriorly
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor"}). The sclerotic ring aligns with
this, implying that the eyes were directed slightly anteriorly also,
increasing the binocular visual region.

[\[OicenicusScleroticplates\]]{#OicenicusScleroticplates
label="OicenicusScleroticplates"}

Despite their delicacy, several sclerotic plates of *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* have been preserved
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat"}). Complete, articulated sclerotic
rings are rare, however, NHMUK PV R4753 (complete) and GLAHM V1921
(partially complete) possess 15 plates, although Andrews' [-@Andrews1910
fig. 23] reconstruction shows only 14. Andrews also notes (p. 31) the
increased ossification of the sclerotic plates through ontogeny. The
sclerotic plates are bipartite, separated into orbital and corneal
portions. The orbital part is squared, with a crenate orbital margin,
and curved to surround the eye within. The corneal portion is flattened
and angled at \~130° internally to the orbital portion, tapering to
about one-half the width of the orbital part at its corneal margin. This
inclination of the sclerotic plates causes a marked doming of the
articulated sclerotic ring; about one-half as high as its diameter. The
corneal margin of the sclerotic plates may be rounded where it meets the
plates on either side. This margin is also straight and does not have
the inclination seen in many other reptiles, allowing @Kirton1983 to
infer that *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* did not possess a scleral sulcus.
The articulation between the sclerotic plates is formed by interlocking
laminae developed on the margins. This is seen as a complex
interdigitation in cross section, although at the surface, the suture
appears straight, becoming wavy towards the corneal edge. Striae on the
surface of the sclerotic plates are mostly parallel to the radial
margins. On the internal and external surfaces, at the junction between
the orbital and corneal portions, the surfaces have irregular
tuberosities from which striae radiate. Interpreted as the attachment
point of the muscles important in accommodation [Cramptori's and
Brückes' muscles: @Kirton1983], the ratio of apertural to external
sclerotic ring diameter of NHMUK PV R4753 is estimated at 0.4.

![image](./img/fig-Oicenicus-vomer.png)
[\[fig:Oicenicus-vomerlat\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-vomerlat
label="fig:Oicenicus-vomerlat"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-vomerdor\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-vomerdor
label="fig:Oicenicus-vomerdor"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-vomer2dor\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-vomer2dor
label="fig:Oicenicus-vomer2dor"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-vomer2med\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-vomer2med
label="fig:Oicenicus-vomer2med"}

[\[OicenicusVomer\]]{#OicenicusVomer label="OicenicusVomer"}

The narrow and elongate vomers suffer from poor preservation and
description, like the palatines
([\[OicenicusPalatine,fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,fig:Oicenicus-vomer,pl05\]](#OicenicusPalatine,fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,fig:Oicenicus-vomer,pl05){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusPalatine,fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,fig:Oicenicus-vomer,pl05"},
Figs 1--4). @Andrews1910 tentatively figured and described a vomer
(NHMUK PV R3533) as left, whereas @Kirton1983 [p. 43] interpreted this
as the right vomer; the latter view is followed here. As discussed above
(see
[\[OicenicusPremaxilla\]](#OicenicusPremaxilla){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusPremaxilla"}), the anteriormost portion is enclosed
within the medial canal of the premaxilla, held ventral to the nasals,
and posterior to this, the vomers form the anteromedial portion of the
palate. The delicacy of the bone means that no single specimen is known
in its entirety, but two examples ( NHMUK PV R4753 and GLAHM V1129)
allow a largely complete restoration to be made
([\[fig:Oicenicus-vomer\]](#fig:Oicenicus-vomer){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-vomer"}). Overall, the vomers feature a narrow
and flattened basal plate from which rises a dorsal sheet that is higher
posteriorly. The anterior extensions of the vomer taper anteriorly and
make up about one-half of the total length of the vomer. They are angled
dorsolaterally, to accept the ventromedial border of the premaxilla
ventrolaterally in a slightly concave facet that continues for much of
the length of the vomer. Posteriorly, the basal plate broadens and the
premaxillary facet becomes less pronounced and is deflected laterally.
Although smooth anteriorly, the surface of this facet becomes rugose
posteriorly. Medially, along the anterior process, the left and right
vomers contact in a simple, roughened butt joint that begins slightly
anterior to the premaxillary facet. This contact between the vomers
excludes the pterygoids from palatal view for about two-thirds of the
length of the vomer, although the pterygoids continue anteriorly for a
short distance dorsal to the vomers.

In the posterior portion of the vomer, the dorsal sheet rises in the
sagittal plane. Anteriorly, this sheet rises gently from the anterior
extension and, dorsally, develops a slight medial flange and laterally
positioned concavity. The ventral border of this concavity is formed by
a dorsally concave ridge that extends posteriorly to the dorsalmost
extent of the dorsal sheet. At this point, the vomer is drawn out into
three prominent projections that are directed anterodorsally. No
specimen shows these projections in their entirety; in NHMUK PV R4753
these are 5 mm wide, with buttress-like bases on the vomer. The extent
of the projections is unknown, but likely supported the structures of
the nasal capsule, like similar projections found on the maxilla and
nasal (see ). The ridge separates the anterodorsal concavity from a more
posterior concavity on the lateral face of the dorsal sheet. Posterior
to these concavities, the dorsal sheet falls sharply towards the
horizontal posterior extension of the vomer. The ventral margin of the
vomer in this region forms the anterior border of the internal naris,
where the bone is thickened and rounded. By analogy with modern
reptiles, @Kirton1983 [p. 44] interpreted this region as the internal
nasal chamber. The anterodorsal concavity forms the floor and medial
wall of the *vestibulum nasi* with the ventral ridge dividing this from
the postvestibular region. Posteriorly lies the choanal tube (part of
the *cavum nasi proprium*, the posterior concavity) that forms a direct
connection between the *vestibulum nasi* and the choana.

The medial surface of the dorsal sheet features an anteriorly narrowing
facet that contacted the anterior process of the pterygoid. Ventral to
this, the vomer is expanded medially to enclose the pterygoids and this
contact is strengthened by a posterior groove. The posterior process of
the vomer fits between the palatine laterally and pterygoid medially.
Here, the vomer has a narrow overlap onto these bones, but this
increases and becomes more rugose anteriorly towards the vertical
expansion of the vomer. The posterior extension is flattened and
horizontal, narrowing posteriorly.

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: left palatine
(NHMUK PV R4753) in ventral (**a**) and dorsal (**b**) view.
Abbreviations: **fm**, maxillary facet; **fpt**, suture with the
pterygoid; **fvo**, vomer facet; **in**, internal narial opening;
**nu**, nutritive foramina and grooves; **pr**, ascending projection.
Scale bar represents 50 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-palatine\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-palatine
label="fig:Oicenicus-palatine"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-palatine.png "fig:"){#fig:Oicenicus-palatine}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-palven\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-palven
label="fig:Oicenicus-palven"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-paldor\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-paldor
label="fig:Oicenicus-paldor"}

[\[OicenicusPalatine\]]{#OicenicusPalatine label="OicenicusPalatine"}

The thin palatine bones form the posterolateral portion of the palate
([\[fig:Oicenicus-palate,fig:Oicenicus-palatine,pl05\]](#fig:Oicenicus-palate,fig:Oicenicus-palatine,pl05){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-palate,fig:Oicenicus-palatine,pl05"}, figs 5,
6). Like the vomers (see
[\[OicenicusVomer\]](#OicenicusVomer){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusVomer"}), their delicate nature has caused
uncertainty in previous identifications. @Andrews1910 [p. 29, fig. 18;
NHMUK PV R4693--5] and @Appleby1956 [p. 423, figs 10 & 11, PETMG R220]
described what they considered right palatines. @Kirton1983 [p. 38,
fig. 10], based on the study of additional specimens, interpreted
Andrews' specimen as a left palatine and Appleby's as a left vomer,
figured in dorsal view. These latter interpretations are followed here.

The palatine comprises a quadrangular posterior plate that divides
anteriorly into a narrow lateral process and broader medial process.
Between these, the palatine forms the posterior margin of the internal
naris. The elongate lateral process is triangular in cross section and
tapers distally. On its dorsal surface, it is overlapped by the maxilla
laterally, with a longitudinal ridge that marks the extent of contact.
This overlap continues posteriorly along the lateral margin of the
palatine and is marked by a small, but complex, tongue-and-groove
structure that holds the dorsomedial margin of the maxilla. The dorsal
surface of the broader medial tongue bears an ascending projection at
the posterior end of the internal naris. @Kirton1983 suggested this
might have supported the wall tissues of the nasopharyngeal duct.
@Andrews1910 showed this process smaller than it is in NHMUK PV R4753
due to breakage. Posteriorly, the palatine is poorly known, but its
extent can be deduced from comparisons with specimens NHMUK PV R4753,
R4693--5 and GLAHM V1129, and other taxa, for example, *Ichthyosaurus*
[@McGowan1973]. The posterior contact with the pterygoid is a transverse
interdigitating suture. At its posterolateral portion, the palatine
forms a small part of the margin of the subtemporal fenestra.

Ventrally, the palatine overlaps the vomer along its medial border. The
border of this contact is marked on the palatine by a small shelf that
develops from the point of division of the anterior processes to hold
the ventrolateral margin of the vomer. Dorsal to this, the medial edge
of the palatine extends dorsomedially as the medial anterior projection
[@Kirton1983], and lies flat against the lateral surface of the vertical
expansion of the vomer. The contact surface is rugose and finely ridged
ventromedially. Both the dorsal and ventral surfaces of the palatine
have branching grooves showing the passage of surrounding vessels.
Foramina pierce the palatine and can be seen on the dorsal surface of
NHMUK PV R4753 around the border of the internal naris. Further grooves
show the paths of blood vessels. @Kirton1983 proposed that these
structures marked the paths of the palatine nerve and blood vessels that
supplied the nasal tissues, possibly including the nasal artery.

[\[OicenicusEpipterygoid\]]{#OicenicusEpipterygoid
label="OicenicusEpipterygoid"}

No example of this bone has been recognised amongst the material
referred to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. It is ossified in the genus
*Ichthyosaurus* [@McGowan1973], but it is not certain whether its
absence in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* indicates its failure to ossify or
loss during collection. The complete lack of known epipterygoids for
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* suggest that it did not ossify. While facets
for articulation with the epipterygoid are present on the parietal
dorsally and the pterygoid ventrally, these are reduced compared to
*Ichthyosaurus* [@McGowan1973], for example, supporting the lack of
ossification of the epipterygoid. Ossification of the epipterygoid is
apparently variable: it was not present in an otherwise complete skull
of *Platypterygius australis* described by @Kear2005a [599], however,
large examples are known from specimens referred to *'Platypterygius'*
(V. Fischer, pers. comm., 2015). This indicates that ossification during
ontogeny may occur, although this doesn't seem to be the case in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.

[\[OicenicusPterygoid\]]{#OicenicusPterygoid label="OicenicusPterygoid"}

The pterygoids are the largest elements in the palate, comprising most
of the posterior portion
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,pl06\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,pl06){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,pl06"}, figs 1, 2). Each pterygoid is
composed of a sheet-like, anterior palatal ramus and a more complex,
posterior quadrate ramus; the latter of these is more robust and so this
portion is often better preserved.

The anterior ramus consists of a rod of bone (visible dorsally) that
extends from the quadrate ramus of the pterygoid anteriorly, anterior to
the level of the internal naris. The anterior portion of the anterior
ramus is narrow and dorsally raised to fit between the two vomers, which
exclude it from palatal view. In their anterior portions (approximately
one-half the length of the pterygoid), the rami from the two pterygoids
curve medially and meet ventrally just posterior to the internal naris
([\[fig:Oicenicus-palate\]](#fig:Oicenicus-palate){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-palate"}), forming the anterior apex of the
interpterygoid vacuity. Posterior to the internal naris, the pterygoid
expands laterally into a horizontal shelf, which is constricted
posteriorly. The pterygoids are raised into medially concave dorsal
flanges that accept and hold the anterior parasphenoidal rostrum
(cultriform process, see
[\[OicenicusParabasisphenoid\]](#OicenicusParabasisphenoid){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusParabasisphenoid"}) between them. Laterally, the
walls of this flange fit into the facet on the medial wall of the vomer
(see [\[OicenicusVomer\]](#OicenicusVomer){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusVomer"}), and the vomer itself lies upon a small
ventrolateral shelf of the pterygoid. Posterior to this region, the
dorsal flange becomes shallower, and the medial border of the pterygoid
is thicker and rounded, marking the lateral border of the interpterygoid
vacuity. Lateral to the main rod of the anterior ramus, the pterygoid is
expanded laterally into a broad sheet that accepts the palatine
anteriorly in an interdigitating transverse suture, and anteromedially
overlaps the posterior process of the vomer on its medial edge. The
lateral border of the pterygoid bears fine striations for this union. A
low ridge extends anterolaterally along the dorsal side of the lateral
sheet, meeting the medial margin of a small lateral flange ( GLAHM
V1921: [\[pl06\]](#pl06){reference-type="ref" reference="pl06"}, figs 1,
2) that overlaps the palatine. Ventrally, the lateral sheet of the
pterygoid is concave posteriorly, interpreted by @Kirton1983 as the
origination point for the *M. adductor mandibulae internus
pterygoideus*. Posterior to this concavity, the sheet narrows and is
variably angled laterally (compare GLAHM V1921 with NHMUK PV R2180 and
R3893).

The quadrate ramus is separated from the palatal ramus by a constriction
formed by emarginations for the subtemporal fenestra laterally and the
interpterygoid vacuity medially. Posteriorly, it is drawn out laterally,
medially, and dorsally into three wing-like flanges that hold the
basisphenoid and quadrate. Laterally, the dorsal and lateral processes
together form a continuous, slightly concave surface for contact with
the medial face of the pterygoid lamella of the quadrate. The ventral
flange of the supratemporal overlaps the medial surface of the dorsal
wing of the pterygoid (as noted by [@Andrews1910 28]; [@Kirton1983 40]).
The medial wing extends ventral to the lateral bar of the stapes and
forms a shelf, dorsally holding the basisphenoid; the anterior portion
of the medial wing forms a socket to accommodate the basipterygoid
processes. Ventral to the stapes, the pterygoid forms a floor to the
cranioquadrate passage and possibly the inner ear cavity [@Kirton1983].
The posterior edge of the medial and lateral wings bear irregular
striations and pitting that extends ventrally and may mark the location
of muscle insertion for the hypaxial series. This inference comes from
the lack of enlarged basal tubers on the basioccipital in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* onto which the muscles are attached in other
reptile groups.

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: right quadrate
(GLAHM V1878) in anterior (**a**), lateral (**b**) and posterior (**c**)
views. Abbreviations: **ac**, articular condyle; **far**, articular
facet; **foq**, quadrate foramen; **fpt**, pterygoid facet; **fqj**,
quadratojugal facet; **fs**, supratemporal facet; **fsa**, surangular
facet; **fst**, stapedial facet; **me**, muscle (*M. adductor mandibulae
externus*) attachment point; **mp**, muscle (*M. adductor mandibulae
posterior*) attachment point; **ocl**, occipital lamella; **ptl**,
pterygoid lamella; **tu**, tubercle for ligamentous attachment to
pterygoid. Scale bar represents 100 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-quadrate\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-quadrate
label="fig:Oicenicus-quadrate"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-quadrate.png "fig:"){#fig:Oicenicus-quadrate
width="\\textwidth"} [\[fig:Oicenicus-quant\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-quant
label="fig:Oicenicus-quant"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-qulat\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-qulat
label="fig:Oicenicus-qulat"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-qupos\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-qupos
label="fig:Oicenicus-qupos"}

[\[OicenicusQuadrate\]]{#OicenicusQuadrate label="OicenicusQuadrate"}

The large and robust quadrate consists of two lamellae: the medial
pterygoid lamella, facing posteromedially, and the lateral occipital
lamella, facing posterolaterally; the latter is visible in occipital
view and bears the articular condyle ventrally
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Oicenicus-palate,fig:Oicenicus-quadrate,tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements,pl06\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Oicenicus-palate,fig:Oicenicus-quadrate,tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements,pl06){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Oicenicus-palate,fig:Oicenicus-quadrate,tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements,pl06"},
figs 3--5). In occipital view, the quadrate has a broad
[C]{.sans-serif}-shape -- convexly curved medially and emarginated
laterally to form the posteromedial border of the quadrate foramen. The
dorsal portion of the external face of the occipital lamella is smooth,
slightly convex laterally, and, in some specmiens, a small facet is
developed dorsally (e.g.  GLAHM V1920), associated with a change in
surface texture, which indicates overlap by the lateral lamina of the
supratemporal. Ventral to this, the external surface is raised is some
specimens along the dorsal margin of the quadrate foramen dorsolaterally
from the stapedial facet (e.g.  LEICT 100'1949/197). The ventral portion
of the occipital face is markedly concave dorsoventrally, broadening
towards the margin of the articular condyle on the ventral surface of
the quadrate. A small rugose area marks the facet for the quadratojugal,
just dorsal to the condyle, along the emarginated lateral margin. The
quadratojugal also contacts the emargination dorsally, forming the
lateral border to the quadrate foramen. Externally, the pterygoid
lamella is largely planar. The border with the occipital lamella is
marked by a ridge that becomes less well defined ventrally. Medial to
this border, and at, or ventral to, one-half of the height of the
quadrate, is the elliptical stapedial facet. This facet varies in its
excavation and position between specimens; it appears as a shallow
rugose depression. When the facet is more deeply excavated, it is
surrounded by a raised and sharp ridge, particularly defined
posteriorly, with a prominent tuberosity ventral to the facet, seen in
well ossified individuals (as in GLAHM V1878). The tuberosity may be
extended into a ridge, and features minute foramina leading @Kirton1983
to interpret this tuberosity as the attachment point for the ligament
that bound the quadrate and pterygoid. On the floor of the stapedial
facet, there is an irregular growth that @Kirton1983 [p. 37] suggested
to be the point of connection for the intercalary cartilage, between the
stapes and quadrate. The dorsal one-third of the pterygoid lamella is
roughened and was overlapped by the ventral ramus of the supratemporal,
which wrapped around onto the occipital lamella. The ventral two-thirds
of the quadrate, excepting the stapedial facet, were closely applied to
the quadrate flange of the pterygoid.

Laterally, the margin of the lateral emargination of the quadrate is
rounded and smooth, made up of finished bone. The dorsal and medial
edges of the quadrate are roughened and grooved for the application of
the cartilage that surrounded this bone. Dorsally, the margin of the
quadrate slots into a ventral groove on the lateral ramus of the
supratemporal (see
[\[OicenicusSupratemporal\]](#OicenicusSupratemporal){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusSupratemporal"}). The anterior cartilage may have
met the epipterygoid, or extended to this region, even if it remained
unossified, as suggested by @Kirton1983 [36--37] in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* and @McGowan1973 [23--25] in *Ichthyosaurus* (see
[\[OicenicusEpipterygoid\]](#OicenicusEpipterygoid){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusEpipterygoid"}). @Andrews1910 [p. 19] noted that
NHMUK PV R2133 has a well-developed angular protrusion on the
ventromedial portion of the quadrate margin. The internal (anterior)
face of the quadrate is concave and forms much of the smooth posterior
wall of the adductor chamber. The central portion of this face likely
provided attachment for the *M. adductor mandibulae posterior*, which
may have originated from a depression in this area. A second, more
dorsal depression may be seen (as in GLAHM V1899) from which the
*M. adductor mandibulae externus* complex may have originated
[@Kirton1983]. The ventral surface of the quadrate forming the robust
and broad articular condyle is irregularly pitted for the application of
the articular cartilage. This face is convex both dorsoventrally and
laterally, allowing smooth motion of the jaw articulation. The condyle
is formed of two bosses, positioned more anterior and posterior and
facing anterolaterally and posterolaterally respectively, separated by a
groove, approximately transversely oriented. Medially, the condyle is
horizontal, but laterally is dorsally deflected, and the groove between
the bosses curves anteriorly. The more anterior boss is smaller than the
posterior, and articulates with the anterolateral portion of the glenoid
fossa on the surangular. The more posterior boss articulates with the
concave anterior face of the articular.

The quadrate is highly variable between specimens and individuals of
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. This may reflect the degree of ossification
exhibited, an effect of the cartilage that surrounds many of the
occipital elements, potentially caused by functional-usage or
ontogenetic variation. Clear differences can be seen in the ossification
of the dorsal and medial margins and the shape of the occipital portion
of the lateral emargination. This can cause the outline of the quadrate
to vary between wide and rounded to narrower and squared (compare GLAHM
V1878 and NHMUK PV R2133), as noted by @Andrews1910 and @Appleby1956.
The development of the stapedial facet, its position and surrounding
features also varies: NHMUK PV R2133 shows the stapedial facet in the
ventral portion of the bone and with a low ridge outline (possibly
reduced by poor preservation), whereas in GLAHM V1920 it is slightly
more dorsally positioned.

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: basisphenoid
portion of the parabasisphenoid (NHMUK PV R4522) in anterior (**a**),
left lateral (**b**), dorsal (**c**) and ventral (**d**) views.
Abbreviations: **btp**, basipterygoid process; **ds**, dorsum sellae;
**fbo**, basioccipital facet; **fst**, stapedial facet; **gr**, median
groove; **icf**, internal carotid foramen; **no**, notch marking
anterior extremity of upturned notochord; **npa**, groove for palatine
ramus of facial (VII) nerve; **pif**, pituitary fossa; **pma**, pit for
muscle origin; **ps**, base of the parasphenoid rostrum; **tr**,
impressions of trabecular cartilage. Scale bar represents 50 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-basisphenoid\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-basisphenoid
label="fig:Oicenicus-basisphenoid"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-basisphenoid.png "fig:"){#fig:Oicenicus-basisphenoid
width="\\textwidth"} [\[fig:Oicenicus-pbsant\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-pbsant
label="fig:Oicenicus-pbsant"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-pbslat\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-pbslat
label="fig:Oicenicus-pbslat"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-pbsdor\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-pbsdor
label="fig:Oicenicus-pbsdor"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-pbsven\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-pbsven
label="fig:Oicenicus-pbsven"}

[\[OicenicusParabasisphenoid\]]{#OicenicusParabasisphenoid
label="OicenicusParabasisphenoid"}

The parabasisphenoid (parasphenoid-basisphenoid) is a complex bone
formed by the fusion of the parasphenoid to the ventral surface of the
basisphenoid, and therefore these are considered together in the present
study
([\[fig:Oicenicus-palate,fig:Oicenicus-basisphenoid,pl07\]](#fig:Oicenicus-palate,fig:Oicenicus-basisphenoid,pl07){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-palate,fig:Oicenicus-basisphenoid,pl07"}). The
parasphenoid rostrum (cultriform process of the parasphenoid) is
frequently broken and poorly known in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. This
forms the base of the braincase, extending forwards to be held between
the anterior rami of the pterygoids (see
[\[OicenicusPterygoid\]](#OicenicusPterygoid){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusPterygoid"}). Here the parabasisphenoid is pinched
in ventrally and so has a diamond cross section in anterior and
posterior views, narrowing anteriorly. Posterior to the parasphenoidal
pterygoid facets, the dorsal surface of the cultriform process becomes
concave and roughened, and was overlain by the fused trabecular
cartilages. For much of the length of this process the bone is deep and
narrow, with a medial ventral ridge, but becomes wider and more
elliptical posteriorly. The parasphenoid rostrum becomes thinner
dorsoventrally as it meets the basisphenoid. Although often difficult to
discern, the parasphenoid widens and extends around anterior and lateral
margins of the internal carotid foramen (see below) on the ventral
surface of the basisphenoid. The parasphenoid also forms a small shelf
on the anterior margin of the elliptical external carotid (see NHMUK PV
R2180 and GLAHM V1886).

The posterior portion of the parabasisphenoid (basisphenoid) forms a
large, complexly shaped ossification anterior to the basioccipital, with
lateral wings anteriorly to hold the palatal ramus of the pterygoid. The
trapezoidal anterior face of the basisphenoid is mostly smooth
periosteal bone and extends laterally from the main body by the
basipterygoid processes. This surface extends posteriorly as a concavity
on the lateral surface of the basisphenoid and lines an extracranial
space, an anterior part of the cranioquadrate passage [@Goodrich1930].
@Kirton1983 proposed that the muscle slips from the extrinsic eye muscle
group might insert here, as in extant crocodilians [@Underwood1970],
although there is no evidence of scarring. A small pit, lateral to the
pituitary fossa (see below) may mark the attachment point of an eye
muscle. Some specimens preserve small nutritive foramina piercing the
anterior surface of the basisphenoid. Medially, the *dorsum sellae*
rises vertically, posterior to the pituitary fossa, interrupting the
smooth anterior surface. The *dorsum sellae* is developed dorsally into
two processes separated by a notch that continues posteriorly on the
posterodorsal surface. @Kirton1983 interpreted these processes as
ossifications at the base of the *pilae antoticae*. Ventral to the
*dorsum sellae*, the paired internal carotid arteries passed through an
undivided foramen that is angled posteroventrally, entering the
basisphenoid on its ventral surface and narrowing along their course.
The hollow on the anterior surface of the basisphenoid between the
internal carotid foramen and the *dorsum sellae* is the pituitary fossa
marking the area where the pituitary body would have been located.
Ventral to the pituitary fossa, lateral to the midline are a pair of
slightly raised ovoid depressions that mark the posterior limit of the
trabecular cartilages [@Kirton1983], termed the lower cylindrical
processes by Siebenrock ([-@Siebenrock1893], translated in
[@Siebenrock1894]; [@Andrews1910]).

Laterally, the basisphenoid is drawn into the short and robust
basipterygoid processes, each with a rugose distal surface and low
marginal ridge indicating that this would have been covered in life by
cartilage. These processes fit into corresponding sockets between the
palatal and quadrate rami of the pterygoids, and the inferred thickness
of cartilage led @Kirton1983 to suggest that some movement was possible
between the palate and braincase. However, the elongate anterior facets
of the pterygoid with the vomer and palatine, and the interlocking
contacts on these bones, suggest that movement of the pterygoid would
have been minimal. The basipterygoid processes have a groove on their
posteroventral edges marking the passage of a nerves or blood vessels,
possibly the palatine ramus of the facial (VII) nerve [@Kirton1983
p. 22]. The lateral surface posterior to the basipterygoid processes is
heavily pitted and angled dorsolaterally and slightly posteriorly
forming the stapedial facet, which contacts the ventral part of the
medial surface of the stapes. This surrounding cartilage may have led to
variation in the ossification of the basipterygoid processes: NHMUK PV
R2164 shows well defined, squared processes, whereas in NHMUK PV R2161
they are more spread and rounded in ventral view [@Andrews1910 fig. 6].
The ventral surface of the basisphenoid is finished in periosteal bone
and is rounded posteriorly. This surface is pierced centrally by the
single unpaired internal carotid foramen. The entirety of the posterior
surface is deeply pitted for contact with the basioccipital. This is
split into two portions, a vertical region ventrally and a
posterodorsally angled region dorsally, separated by a horizontal ridge.
Vertical ridges separate the basioccipital facet from the lateral
stapedial facets. A median groove runs dorsoventrally across the whole
of the posterior surface, meeting the dorsal notch between the two
processes of the *dorsum sellae*. This groove may indicate that the
basisphenoid originally ossified from two lateral centres
[@Andrews1910; @Kirton1983], and some examples show cracks or are broken
along this line. @Andrews1910 and @McGowan1973 concluded that the dorsal
notch marked the point of an upturned vestige of the notochord.

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: right prootic
(NHMUK PV R4522) in anterior (**a**) and posterior (**b**) views.
Abbreviations: **iaa**, impression of the ampulla of the anterior
vertical semicircular canal; **ihc**, impression of the horizontal
canal; **isa**, impression of the sacculus; **iut**, impression of the
utriculus; **ivc**, impression of the anterior vertical semicircular
canal; **mj**, ridge for attachment of the jaw adductor muscles. Scale
bar represents 50 mm. [\[fig:Oicenicus-prootic\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-prootic
label="fig:Oicenicus-prootic"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-prootic.png "fig:"){#fig:Oicenicus-prootic}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-proant\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-proant
label="fig:Oicenicus-proant"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-propos\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-propos
label="fig:Oicenicus-propos"}

[\[OicenicusProotic\]]{#OicenicusProotic label="OicenicusProotic"}

The small, subrectangular prootics are surrounded by the cartilage of
the otic capsule, lacking direct bony contact with the rest of the
braincase
([\[fig:Oicenicus-prootic,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,pl08\]](#fig:Oicenicus-prootic,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,pl08){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-prootic,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,pl08"}, figs 1,
2). This, and the disassociated nature of the material, makes their
orientation and placement problematic. @Kirton1983 resolved this problem
by comparing the prootic of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* with an
acid-prepared Liassic skull (NEWHM G.44.19) indicating that the figured
prootic ([1.7](#fig:Oicenicus-prootic){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-prootic"}, NHMUK PV R4522) must be a right
prootic. This bone takes the shape of a widened D in posterior view: the
lateral edge is straight whilst the medial edge is gently curved. Along
with the semicircular canals on the internal face (see below), this
feature can aid in orienting the bone. This orientation agrees with
@McGowan1973, but disagrees with @Appleby1956 [p. 412, fig. 4] who had
reversed the two canals and sidedness of the bone.

The external (anterior) face is roughened and irregularly pierced by
nutritive foramina for the origin of muscle slips. Kirton
([-@Kirton1983], [after @Haas1973] suggested that either part of the
*M. adductor mandibulae externus* or the *M. protractor pterygoidei*
attached there as in living reptiles. Ventrally and medially, a ridge is
developed for this attachment towards, and parallel to, the margins of
the prootic. The edges of the prootic were continuous with the cartilage
of the otic capsule and so are irregularly pitted. The thickness of the
prootic represents cross sections of the walls of the otic capsule, and
these are thickest at the ventralmost corner of the bone. The internal
(posterior) face of the prootic, like the opisthotic and supraoccipital
(see ), shows the impressions of the membranous labyrinth. These each
take the form of a [V]{.sans-serif}-shaped, smooth-floored excavation.
The position of the prootic in the anterolateral region of the otic
capsule means that the limbs of the impression should accommodate the
anterior vertical and the horizontal semicircular canals respectively
[@Baird1970; @Kirton1983]. Kirton's [-@Kirton1983 pp 27--28] comparison
with modern reptiles led her to conclude that the wider medial channel
must have accommodated the horizontal canal, whereas the narrower
lateral impression housed the anterior vertical canal. This was based
upon the assumption that the horizontal canal passed externally from its
source to a terminal ampulla [@Hamilton1964; @Baird1970], whereas in
Appleby's [-@Appleby1956] interpretation, the horizontal canal would
pass internally; Kirton's view is followed here [@Evans2008]. The
horizontal canal swells ventrally and this space is occupied by the
terminal ampulla for the anterior vertical canal ["anterior ampulla" of
@Baird1970 fig. 7]. Medial to the depression for the anterior ampulla,
where the two arms of the [V]{.sans-serif} converge, the impression is
widened further, possibly representing the position of the sacculus.
@Appleby1956 indicated this was divided into two parts: the ventral part
is a continuation of the horizontal canal impression that @Kirton1983
interpreted as part of the utriculus and may be offset slightly
([@Andrews1910 fig. 3 A], NHMUK PV R2162).

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: right opisthotic
(NHMUK PV R4522) in anterior (**a**), posterior (**b**), medial (**c**),
ventral (**d**) and dorsal (**e**) views. Abbreviations: **fbo**,
basioccipital facet; **fs**, supratemporal facet; **fst**, stapedial
facet; **hy**, groove for transmission of hyomandibular branch of facial
(VII) or glossopharyngeal (XI) nerve; **ihc**, impression of horizontal
semicircular canal; **ipc**, impression of posterior vertical
semicircular canal; **ma**, axial muscle attachment point; **me**,
muscle (*M. adductor mandibulae externus*) attachment point; **pam**,
impression of posterior ampulla; **poc**, paroccipital process; **vf**,
vagus foramen. Scale bar represents 50 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-opisthotic\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-opisthotic
label="fig:Oicenicus-opisthotic"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-opisthotic.png "fig:"){#fig:Oicenicus-opisthotic}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-opiant\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-opiant
label="fig:Oicenicus-opiant"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-opipos\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-opipos
label="fig:Oicenicus-opipos"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-opimed\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-opimed
label="fig:Oicenicus-opimed"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-opiven\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-opiven
label="fig:Oicenicus-opiven"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-opidor\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-opidor
label="fig:Oicenicus-opidor"}

[\[OicenicusOpisthotic\]]{#OicenicusOpisthotic
label="OicenicusOpisthotic"}

The opisthotics consist of a massive occipital portion, which takes part
in the walls of the otic capsule, and a slender paroccipital process
that reaches dorsolaterally towards, and articulates with, the skull
roof
([\[fig:Oicenicus-opisthotic,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,pl08\]](#fig:Oicenicus-opisthotic,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,pl08){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-opisthotic,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,pl08"}, figs
3--8). @Appleby1956 [p. 414] disagreed with Andrews' [-@Andrews1910
p. 9] orientation of the opisthotic; Appleby's interpretation is
followed here. The anterior face is concave and the surface is
roughened, with small nutrient foramina, for the attachment of muscle
slips, possibly of the *M. adductor mandibulae externus* group
[@Kirton1983]. A ridge extends dorsolaterally across this face and along
the paroccipital process. This surface extends dorsally, where it is
also roughened and pierced by foramina, indicating further muscle
attachment. Ventrally, the opisthotic is roughened for the application
of cartilage, and divided into two facets for articulation with the
basioccipital anteromedially, and the stapes laterally. The
basioccipital facet is smaller and consists of a dorsal deflection of
the posteromedial corner of the ventral surface of the opisthotic. A
larger area of the ventral surface comprises a facet for the stapes,
which is divided into two parts by a groove that runs mediolaterally.
The anteromedial face of the opisthotic faces the otic capsule. This
face shows a wide [V]{.sans-serif}-shaped impression formed by two
smooth-floored channels that join anteroventrally, impressions of the
posterior components of the membranous labyrinth of the inner ear. The
posterior channel likely housed the posterior vertical semicircular
canal [@Baird1970; @Kirton1983]. The anterior channel curves slightly
towards the horizontal and is interpreted as the impression for the
horizontal semicircular canal [@Baird1970; @Kirton1983]. A large
concavity in which the posterior ampulla was likely held is developed
where the two channels join [@Baird1970; @Kirton1983], and the posterior
channel widens towards this junction. The bone that surrounds the
labyrinth impression is pitted irregularly for the cartilaginous
component of the otic capsule. The impressions of the labyrinth are
continued by similar impressions seen on the anterolateral face of the
supraoccipital and the posterior face of the prootic (see
[\[OicenicusProotic,OicenicusSupraoccipital\]](#OicenicusProotic,OicenicusSupraoccipital){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusProotic,OicenicusSupraoccipital"}). Slightly
anterior to the ventral ampulla impression, the groove on the ventral
surface notches the ventral margin. The medial articulating surface is
narrower posteriorly and also notched by the vagus foramen on the
posterior face ["jugular foramen" of @Andrews1910], which may curve
forward around the anteromedial face (see NHMUK PV R2133).

The posterior face of the opisthotic dorsally shows a continuation of
the pitting for muscle attachment from the dorsal surface. Ventral to
this, the lateral wall of the channel of the vagus foramen continues
horizontally. This is held medially between the dorsal portion of the
opisthotic dorsally, which continues as a ridge from the paroccipital
process, and the dorsal margin of the basioccipital facet ventrally,
which is here raised. The opisthotic possibly contacts the exoccipital
around this foramen, but an articular facet can only be seen in
well-ossified specimens ( NHMUK PV R2161 and LEICT 100'1949/64;
[@Appleby1956]) indicating that the contact was not close, except in
these specimens [@Kirton1983]. The dorsal exoccipital facet, when
ossified, is developed on a bony projection from the dorsomedial corner
of the bone, whereas the ventral facet is developed only rarely
[@Appleby1956; @Kirton1983]. The opisthotic is drawn out dorsolaterally
into the paroccipital process, narrowing slightly distally. @Kirton1983
described this as slender, however, it can appear variably developed
depending on the length of the paroccipital process; the holotype of
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* (NHMUK PV R2133) has rather a thick, short
paroccipital process that is slightly compressed dorsolaterally.
Dorsally, this process forms the floor of the posttemporal fossa, and
ventrally contributed to the roof of the cranioquadrate passage. At its
distal end, the paroccipital process is flattened and roughened for the
application of cartilage where it meets the ventral ramus of the
supratemporal (see
[\[OicenicusSupratemporal\]](#OicenicusSupratemporal){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusSupratemporal"}). The tip is often poorly ossified,
and it ends in a blunt ellipse with little evidence for a developed
facet on the supratemporal. In well-ossified individuals (e.g. the
holotype of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, NHMUK PV R2133, and LEICT
100'1949/64) the distal end forms a two-part supratemporal facet,
although still some cartilage would have intervened. @Kirton1983 further
suggested the possibility of some movement between these elements, but
the two-part opisthotic facet on the supratemporal would likely have
mitigated this.

[\[OicenicusSupraoccipital\]]{#OicenicusSupraoccipital
label="OicenicusSupraoccipital"}

The supraoccipital forms an arch around the dorsal part of the *foramen
magnum* and takes part laterally in the otic capsule
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,pl09\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,pl09){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,pl09"}, figs
1--5). This arch sits atop the exoccipitals (see
[\[OicenicusExoccipital\]](#OicenicusExoccipital){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusExoccipital"}), and underlaps the parietals medially
(see [\[OicenicusParietal\]](#OicenicusParietal){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusParietal"}). Anteriorly, the dorsal portion of the
surface of the supraoccipital is smooth with two anterior-directed
ridges that form an anteriorly-open [C]{.sans-serif}-shape in dorsal and
ventral views. Ventrally, the anterior surface is slightly roughened.
Two laterally-directed foramina pierce the lateral walls on the medial
surface; intraosseous canals pass through to the posterior face. The
dorsal margin of the supraoccipital has a shallow, transverse groove
that is roughened, indicating the presence of the cartilaginous portion
of the supraoccipital dorsally, ventral to the parietal. This margin and
groove are variably developed depending on the level of ossification of
the individuals. The dorsal groove widens laterally and anteriorly
towards the edges of the supraoccipital and is separated from the
internal face by a sharp ridge. The ventral exoccipital facets show the
effect of the strong anterior extension of the supratemporal in their
apex-anterior, triangular shape. These facets are concave to accept the
dorsal surface of the exoccipitals, which fits closely with only a thin
layer of connective tissue intervening [@Kirton1983]. On the
anterolateral face of the supraoccipital, further impressions of the
structures from the otic capsule can be seen, which face
ventrolaterally. These impressions are [T]{.sans-serif}-shaped, the stem
directed anteroventrally. @Kirton1983 interpreted these as impressions
of the posterior vertical (dorsal) and anterior vertical (ventral)
semicircular canals at their point of origin from the common crus.

The posterior face of the supratemporal is roughened dorsally where it
is overlapped by the parietal, smoother ventrally, and is slightly
convex following the dorsoventral curvature. Dorsally, it may be squared
or more rounded, like a semicircular arch (compare NHMUK PV R2162 and
LEICT 100'1949/43). Lateral to the *foramen magnum*, the surface is
pierced by foramina (from the internal surface) that lie in shallow
depressions and face posterolaterally. Lateral to these foramina, the
bone is notched immediately dorsal to the capsular region. Dorsal to the
*foramen magnum*, the internal arch of the supraoccipital is variable.
This may be a simple arch, but frequently a blunt median process
projects from the dorsal surface of the *foramen magnum*. The ventral
opening of the arch on the supraoccipital is constricted by the medial
expansion of the bone in most specimens ("lateral processes" of
[@Andrews1910]; [@Appleby1956]). Where present, the surfaces of these
projections are roughened for the attachment of cartilage or ligaments
that may have separated the supratemporal arch from the *foramen magnum*
ventrally [@Andrews1910; @Kirton1983]. @Andrews1910 suggested that the
spinal cord occupied only the ventral portion (i.e. between the
exoccipitals) rather than the entire, considerable, vertical extent of
the *foramen magnum* [@Kirton1983]. The dorsal (supraoccipital) portion
of the *foramen magnum* may have carried other structures, including
perhaps the paired cerebral veins, as suggested by @Kirton1983, in the
two concavities either side of the median process in the roof of the
*foramen magnum*. Alternatively, the lateral foramina may have allowed
passage of the lateral branches of the *vena capitis dorsalis* into the
cranial cavity [@Kirton1983]. In some reptile groups, these enter the
braincase anterior to the supraoccipital, but may have moved
posteriorly, becoming "trapped" [@Kirton1983 p. 31] in the lateral edge
of the supraoccipital in *Ophthalmosaurus* and *Ichthyosaurus*.
Furthermore, @McGowan1973, following @Andrews1910, suggested that the
foramina carried extensions of the endolymphatic sac, as in extant
lizards, for example, Iguanidae and Gekkonidae. Although the purpose of
the endolymphatic sac is uncertain [@Kluge1967; @Kluge1987; @Bauer1989],
it seems to play an important role in adult calcium metabolism or
skeletal ossification [@Mangione2001; @Daza2008].

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: left exoccipital
(NHMUK PV R4522) in lateral (**a**) and medial (**b**) views.
Abbreviations: **fbo**, basioccipital facet; **fhy**, foramina conveying
branches of the hypoglossal (XII) nerve; **fop**, opisthotic facet;
**fso**, supraoccipital facet; **mo**, muscle (occipital muscles)
attachment point; **vf**, vagus foramen. Scale bar represents 50 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-exoccipital\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-exoccipital
label="fig:Oicenicus-exoccipital"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-exoccipital.png "fig:"){#fig:Oicenicus-exoccipital}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-exolat\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-exolat
label="fig:Oicenicus-exolat"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-exomed\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-exomed
label="fig:Oicenicus-exomed"}

[\[OicenicusExoccipital\]]{#OicenicusExoccipital
label="OicenicusExoccipital"}

The two exoccipitals form the sides of the *foramen magnum* as short
columns between the supraoccipital dorsally and the basioccipital
ventrally
([\[fig:Oicenicus-exoccipital,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements,pl09\]](#fig:Oicenicus-exoccipital,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements,pl09){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-exoccipital,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements,pl09"},
figs 6--11). Dorsally, the contact surface is smooth and slopes
ventrally and anterolaterally, following the ventral surface on the
supraoccipital. Lateral to the supraoccipital facet, each exoccipital
has a small contact with the opisthotic. This facet is divided into two
parts, and the dorsal part forms a small lip over the contribution of
the exoccipital to the vagus foramen. The ventral contact with the
opisthotic occurs along the ventral edges of the exoccipital
["posteroventral protuberance" of @Appleby1956]. As mentioned above (see
[\[OicenicusOpisthotic\]](#OicenicusOpisthotic){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusOpisthotic"}) the contact is close only in
well-ossified individuals, otherwise cartilage intervened. The ventral
surface of the exoccipital is roughened where cartilage was applied for
contact with the basioccipital. This facet is elliptical and convex to
fit into the exoccipital facets on the basioccipital, although this
contact was not as close as the contact between exoccipital and
supraoccipital. Anteriorly, the exoccipital is drawn out into
tongue-like projections making it more triangular ventrally and
extending the contact with the basioccipital [@Andrews1910]. Dorsal to
this, the dorsal surface protrudes slightly anteriorly to form a groove
that extends around the bone laterally as the vagus foramen. Medially,
the exoccipital is pierced by two foramina anteriorly (the posterior is
larger), on this tongue, interpreted by Kirton ([-@Kirton1983], [after
@Andrews1910]) as exits for branches of the hypoglossal (XII) nerve.
These pass through the exoccipital before emerging on its lateral and
posterior faces. The anterior lateral exit is the smaller foramen and
opens into the vagus foramen. @Maisch1997a described a pair of
exoccipitals (SMNS 10170), one of which had three foramina (five between
the two exoccipitals) that may have carried the fourth branch of the XII
nerve. Specimen GPIT 1795/2 shows a splitting of the anterior foramina.
When joined, this would carry two branches (first and second) of the XII
nerve. A ridge on the posterior face, extending obliquely down from the
dorsomedial edge, is roughened, possibly for the attachment of the
occipital muscles [@Kirton1983].

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: basioccipital
(NHMUK PV R4522) in anterior (**a**), dorsal (**b**), posterior (**c**)
and left lateral (**d**) views. Abbreviations: **ac**, articular
condyle; **eca**, extracondylar area; **fbs**, basisphenoid facet;
**fex**, exoccipital facet; **fom**, floor of the foramen magnum;
**fop**, opisthotic facet; **fst**, stapedial facet; **icd**,
impressions of the cochlear duct; **n**, ventral notch; **no**,
notochordal pit. Scale bar represents 100 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-basioccipital\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-basioccipital
label="fig:Oicenicus-basioccipital"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-basioccipital.png "fig:"){#fig:Oicenicus-basioccipital
width="\\textwidth"} [\[fig:Oicenicus-bocant\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-bocant
label="fig:Oicenicus-bocant"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-bocdor\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-bocdor
label="fig:Oicenicus-bocdor"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-bocpos\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-bocpos
label="fig:Oicenicus-bocpos"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-boclat\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-boclat
label="fig:Oicenicus-boclat"}

[\[OicenicusBasioccipital\]]{#OicenicusBasioccipital
label="OicenicusBasioccipital"}

llSSSS Specimen & & Total width &\
(lr)4-6 & & & Left & Right & Proportion of total width (%)\
NHMUK & R2161 & 89.1 & 8.7 & 6.6 & 17.2\
& R2162 & 88.95 & 9.85 & 10.2 & 22.5\
& R3533 & 48 & 7.5 & 6.7 & 29.6\
& R10082 & 91.05 & 13.4 & 9.75 & 25.4\
& R2164 & 81.7 & 12.05 & 14.7 & 32.7\
& R2155 & 83 & 9.45 & 6.1 & 18.7\
& 47430 & 72.95 & 7.8 & 8.95 & 23\

\

The massive basioccipital comprises the lowest portion of the occiput
and forms the whole, large sub-hemispherical boss of the occipital
condyle
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof-palate,fig:Oicenicus-basioccipital,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,pl10\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof-palate,fig:Oicenicus-basioccipital,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,pl10){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof-palate,fig:Oicenicus-basioccipital,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,pl10"}).
The anterior and lateral faces are flattened and heavily pitted for a
relatively thick covering of cartilage [@Kirton1983]. The ventral
one-half of the anterior face is developed into two oval bosses,
separated by a central vertical groove, that mark the contact with the
basisphenoid. These bosses form a notch in the ventral surface of the
basioccipial that is particularly evident in specimens where the groove
is well developed (e.g.  NHMUK PV R4522;
[1.10](#fig:Oicenicus-basioccipital){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-basioccipital"}). A diamond-shaped area that
bears a small central pit is developed dorsal to the basisphenoid facet.
This area may be drawn out into an anterior process (shown in GLAHM
V1070) that @Kirton1983 proposed as the homologue of the basioccipital
peg more clearly seen in *Ichthyosaurus* [@McGowan1973]. @Kirton1983
further proposed that this structure was a vestige of the notochord
extending into the *cavum cranii*. This feature is highly variable
between taxa and its presence is homoplastic across ichthyosaur
phylogeny [@Motani1999c; @Maisch2000c]. As the diamond-shaped area in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* matches the relative position to the
notochordal pit in *Ichthyosaurus*, it is likely that this does
represent a vestige of the basioccipital peg. The development of the
basioccipital peg may represent the extent of ossification of braincase
elements in different taxa. Dorsally, the basioccipital features two
lateral facets for the exoccipitals. These are concave, rounded
depressions with a heavily rugose surface into which the ventral face of
the exoccipital fits, likely with much cartilage intervening. The
exoccipital facets are almost continuous with the anterior and lateral
faces of the basioccipital, but the posterior and medial margins are
raised into a high wall. Between the two exoccipital facets is a medial
sagittal ridge with a central, longitudinal channel, surfaced with
finished bone. This marks the ventral surface of the *foramen magnum*,
which is surrounded laterally by the two exoccipitals and the
supraoccipital dorsally. Variation is seen in the surface of this
channel: the holotype of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* (NHMUK PV R2133) has
an hourglass-shaped area of smooth bone, while in NHMUK PV 47430 there
is only a small triangular section of smooth bone posteriorly,
surrounded by roughened bone. The posterior articular surface of the
parasphenoid faces posterodorsally, while the anterior face of the
basioccipital is flat. Therefore in articulation, the basioccipital is
angled with the anterior surface facing anteroventrally and the
basioccipital condyle directed posterodorsally
([\[fig:Oicenicus-occlat\]](#fig:Oicenicus-occlat){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-occlat"}).

The lateral faces of the basioccipital are divided into two facets that
mark the contact with the stapes ventrally and opisthotic dorsally. Like
the anterior face, this region is rugose for cartilage attachment. The
opisthotic facet is smaller than the stapedial facet and divided into
two parts: a posterodorsal, deeply pitted, triangular portion, and
ventral and anterior to this, a circular raised area of smooth bone.
Based on her reconstruction of the occipital region, @Kirton1983 posited
that the cartilage between the opisthotic and basioccipital thinned
anteroventrally, suggesting a thinning of the walls of the otic capsule.
This is coupled with a small depression just anterior to the contact
surface with the opisthotic, interpreted as part of the cochlear recess.
The ventral portion of the lateral face is continuous with the
basisphenoid facet on the anterior face of the basioccipital and
contacts the basioccipital facet on the medial head of the stapes.

The articular condyle occupies much of the central portion of the
posterior face of the basioccipital. This surface is irregular for
application of the articular cartilage, but not as rugose as the
anterior face. The convex condyle is centrally placed and has a
near-central notochordal pit that is elongated dorsoventrally and
variably developed. @Appleby1956 [p. 407] further described
discontinuous concentric striations that surround the notochordal pit in
well-preserved specimens. @Andrews1910 [p. 6] noted that the dorsal part
of the condyle might be pinched, as in the holotype specimen (NHMUK PV
R2133). The wide extracondylar area, which extends from the sides of the
basioccipital ventrally as an elongate, concave strip is developed
around the condyle
([\[tbl:Oicenicus-basioccipital-measurements\]](#tbl:Oicenicus-basioccipital-measurements){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:Oicenicus-basioccipital-measurements"}). This includes
two convex areas of smooth periosteal bone that are separated from the
condyle by posteromedial ridges. The smooth areas of the extracondylar
area are variable in extent, and may reach a point dorsal to the
notochordal pit on the condyle in some specmiens, but not so far
dorsally in others, with great variation between these extremes
[@Appleby1956]. Although not always clear, these areas are separated
ventrally by a narrow, roughened area around the ventral notch that may
be raised dorsal to the flanking smooth surfaces.

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: right stapes (NHMUK
PV R4522) in anterior (**a**), posterior (**b**), dorsal (**c**) and
ventral (**d**) views. Abbreviations: **fbo**, basioccipital facet;
**fbs**, basisphenoid facet; **fop**, opisthotic facet; **fps**, facet
for pterygoid and supratemporal; **fpt**, pterygoid facet; **fq**,
quadrate facet; **hp**, hyoid process; **hy**, groove for hyomandibular
branch of facial (VII) or glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve; **ms**, muscle
scar; **sta**, path of stapedial artery. Scale bar represents 50 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-stapes\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-stapes
label="fig:Oicenicus-stapes"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-stapes.png "fig:"){#fig:Oicenicus-stapes
width="\\textwidth"} [\[fig:Oicenicus-stant\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-stant
label="fig:Oicenicus-stant"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-stpos\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-stpos
label="fig:Oicenicus-stpos"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-stdor\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-stdor
label="fig:Oicenicus-stdor"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-stven\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-stven
label="fig:Oicenicus-stven"}

[\[OicenicusStapes\]]{#OicenicusStapes label="OicenicusStapes"}

Articulating between the braincase and the quadrate, the stapes is
integral to the posterior skull, despite being a hyoid derivative
([@Romer1956];
[\[fig:Oicenicus-stapes,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements,pl11\]](#fig:Oicenicus-stapes,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements,pl11){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-stapes,fig:Oicenicus-occipital,tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements,pl11"}).
The stapes has a massive medial head that contacts the basioccipital and
basisphenoid and a more slender shaft that extends ventrolaterally to
contact the quadrate. Medially, the head of the stapes abuts against
broad surfaces on the sides of the basioccipital and basisphenoid (see
[\[OicenicusParabasisphenoid,OicenicusBasioccipital\]](#OicenicusParabasisphenoid,OicenicusBasioccipital){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusParabasisphenoid,OicenicusBasioccipital"}) rather
than fitting into a *fenestra ovalis* [@Romer1956; @Kirton1983]. This
head of the stapes is broad, convex and rugose for the application of
cartilage. @Kirton1983 noted that only a small area of the stapes
contacted the periotic (perilymphatic) cistern, which is unlike the more
extensive contacts that are seen in many modern reptiles [@Baird1970].
@Appleby1961 reported an anterodorsally directed groove on the posterior
side of the head. Dorsally, the stapes articulates with the ventral side
of the opisthotic in a bipartite facet, each portion separated by an
anteromedially directed groove that corresponds to a similar groove in
the stapedial facet of the opisthotic (see
[\[OicenicusOpisthotic\]](#OicenicusOpisthotic){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusOpisthotic"}). When in articulation, this groove
forms a channel, probably accommodating nerves. The opisthotic facet on
the stapes is roughened and cartilage may have intervened in the
contact, leading to variable development of this facet. Clear separation
can be seen in the articulated braincase of specimen PETMG R220
([\[fig:Oicenicus-occipital\]](#fig:Oicenicus-occipital){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-occipital"}). The restoration of this specimen
is however imperfect, for example, the right stapes does not contact the
quadrate laterally (see below and
[\[OicenicusQuadrate\]](#OicenicusQuadrate){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusQuadrate"}).

Lateral to the opisthotic facet, the dorsal surface of the stapes is
smooth and continuous anteriorly with the lateral surface of the
basisphenoid. This surface falls from the high medial head as the stapes
narrows laterally into its shaft. In this portion, the stapes forms part
of the posteroventral floor of the cranioquadrate passage dorsally. The
stapes contacts the pterygoid in two facets, medially and laterally. The
medial contact is ventral on the medial head, which rests on the dorsal
surface of the medial flange of the pterygoid (see
[\[OicenicusPterygoid\]](#OicenicusPterygoid){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusPterygoid"}), although there is no clear facet on
the stapes. Laterally, the stapes contacts the posterior edge of the
quadrate flange of the pterygoid where the pterygoid is overlapped by
the supratemporal. This facet is more clearly seen as a rugosity on the
anterior surface of the distal stapedial shaft that extends for most of
the length of the shaft. @Kirton1983 described NHMUK PV R2133 as showing
an articulated stapes, quadrate, supratemporal (her squamosal) and
pterygoid in articulation. While these elements are no longer
articulated, it can still be seen that the stapes had extensive contact
with the supratemporal along the anteriormost surface of the stapedial
shaft. Dorsal to the rugosity of the pterygoid-supratemporal facet is a
ridge that twists ventrally along the shaft as it nears the medial head
of the stapes. The ventral margin of the stapedial shaft is notably
excavated lateral to the medial head of the stapes, between the two
pterygoid facets, creating a space between these two bones; there is no
stapedial facet. The distal face of the shaft is a pinched elliptical
facet that contacts the medial face of the quadrate. Cartilage would
have been applied to the pitted surface and the level of individual
ossification would cause the variable development in the stapedial facet
on the quadrate (see
[\[OicenicusQuadrate\]](#OicenicusQuadrate){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusQuadrate"}).

The relationship of the stapes to its surrounding tissues has caused
some of the many features described above. The channel between the
opisthotic-stapes contact was assigned to the glossopharyngeal (IX)
nerve by @Andrews1910, @Appleby1956 [@Appleby1961] and @Kirton1983.
Their proposed route for the glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* is unusual among reptiles. In most living
reptiles, the nerve exits through the vagus foramen (see
[\[OicenicusOpisthotic,OicenicusExoccipital\]](#OicenicusOpisthotic,OicenicusExoccipital){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusOpisthotic,OicenicusExoccipital"}), although some
taxa have an additional foramen through which this nerve exits the skull
(e.g. some turtles: [@Bellairs1981]). Reconstruction of the otic capsule
([\[fig:Oicenicus-occipital\]](#fig:Oicenicus-occipital){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-occipital"}) suggests that the channel emerges
from the most ventral region of the otic capsule, near the cochlear
recess of the osseous labyrinth [@Kirton1983]. Kirton alternatively
proposed that it could carry the hyomandibular branch of the facial
(VII) nerve. The facial (VII) nerve originates from the anterior edge of
the otic capsule, normally passing posterodorsally over the head of the
stapes, medial to the dorsal process [@Hopson1979; @Stark1979]. In this
interpretation, the anterior half of the opisthotic facet on the stapes
may be equivalent to the dorsal process. @McGowan1973 suggested a
similar channel in *Ichthyosaurus* may have accommodated the stapedial
artery. However, @Kirton1983 thought this unlikely as a similar route is
absent in other reptiles: the stapedial artery passes extracranially
along the lateral wall of the braincase, dorsal to the stapedial shaft
and alongside the *vena capitis lateralis* [@Bellairs1981]. The
glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve typically passes medial to the stapedial
artery, ventral to the otic capsule, supporting its passage between the
opisthotic and stapes. The space created between the stapes and
pterygoid may have allowed passage of the stapedial artery. A notch that
may mark the upwards passage of this artery dorsal to the
basipterygoidal processes is present on the anterior portion of the
medial head of the stapes [@Kirton1983]. Appleby's [-@Appleby1961]
reconstruction does not show a space between the stapes and pterygoid.
He thus concluded that the stapedial artery passed through the groove on
the posterior side of the stapedial head. This groove may instead mark
the continued path of the structures that passed through the channel in
the opisthotic-stapes contact; the absence of a continuation for this
groove and its ultimate origin makes its true nature uncertain.

[\[OicenicusDentary\]]{#OicenicusDentary label="OicenicusDentary"}

The dentary forms much of the anterior and lateral portions of the
mandible, extending for much of its length, and holds the entirety of
the lower tooth row
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Oicenicus-jaw,tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Oicenicus-jaw,tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Oicenicus-jaw,tbl:Oicenicus-skull-measurements"}).
Its form corresponds to that of the premaxilla in many respects. The
anterior extremity tapers towards the anterior of the mandible and
medially the two dentaries meet in the anterior part of the mandibular
symphysis, which is continued posteriorly by the splenials
[@Andrews1910]. Externally, the dentary is convex, and wide dorsally to
accommodate the tooth row. Towards the dorsal part of the external face,
a longitudinal groove with associated foramina passes into an
intraosseous passage, akin to that seen in the premaxillae, and extends
for approximately two-thirds of the dentary. Anteriorly, this groove
becomes discontinuous and the pitting for the foramina that pierce the
groove is clearer. From the anterior tip, the dentary deepens
posteriorly, reaching its maximum depth at about one-half of its length.
The medial face of each dentary is grooved and when articulated they
form the anterior portion of the channel which holds the Meckelian
cartilage. Like the premaxillae, the anteriormost tips of the dentaries
are separated and this space would likely have been filled by connective
tissue. Posterior to their anterior separation, the dentary is largely
in contact with the splenial medially and the internal face is
longitudinally grooved and roughened. It is often difficult to see the
anterior extent of contact with the anterior fork of the splenial, but
this contact may be marked by changes in the surface texture of the
dentary towards the dorsal and ventral margins of the medial surface. At
the posterior of the mandibular symphysis, there is a low ridge towards
the ventral of the medial face of the dentary that runs ventrally and
around its ventral margin. This marks the extent of contact with the
angular, which intervenes between the dentary and splenial and briefly
runs along the ventral margin of the dentary.

Dorsally, the dentary forms the alveolar groove between the raised
lateral and medial walls. The anteriormost portion, along part of the
symphysis has no medial wall and the teeth are small. Strong depressions
on the lateral wall of the alveolar groove indicate close placement of
the teeth here. Posteriorly, the groove widens to accommodate larger
teeth and the medial wall is raised dorsal to the lateral wall so that
the curved teeth (see
[\[OicenicusDentition\]](#OicenicusDentition){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusDentition"}) are angled dorsolaterally like in the
premaxilla. The groove extends and is dentigerous for about two-thirds
of the length of the mandible, almost the entire length of the dentary.
Towards the posterior of the dentary, the alveolar groove narrows, and
the posteriormost tooth is positioned slightly posterior to the external
naris. The groove here shallows, narrows, and is pinched out posterior
to the posteriormost tooth by the lateral and medial walls. Posteriorly,
the dentary tapers dorsoventrally and mediolaterally, becoming more
superficial on the lateral face of the mandible. Here, the dentary is
excluded from medial view by the surangular and splenial.

![image](./img/fig-Oicenicus-lower-jaw.png){width="19cm"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-jawlat\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-jawlat
label="fig:Oicenicus-jawlat"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-jawmed\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-jawmed
label="fig:Oicenicus-jawmed"}

[\[OicenicusSplenial\]]{#OicenicusSplenial label="OicenicusSplenial"}

The splenial covers much of the internal (medial) surface of the lower
jaw
([\[fig:Oicenicus-jaw,pl12\]](#fig:Oicenicus-jaw,pl12){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-jaw,pl12"}, figs 1, 2). Its anterior region is
forked, with the rami applied to the dorsal and ventral margins of the
dentary, and allowing the confluence of the Meckelian canals between the
two dentaries. The rami of the fork are also rugose on their exposed
medial faces marking their participation in the mandibular symphysis
[@Andrews1910], which extends posterior to the main body of the
splenial. The opening for the Meckelian canal may be the foramen
described by @Gilmore1905 [@Gilmore1906]. For much of its length the
splenial takes the form of a thin, vertical sheet of bone. Dorsally
placed on the internal (lateral) face, a ridge with a wide, longitudinal
groove ventrally is developed where the splenial forms the medial and
dorsal walls to the Meckelian canal. The ridge becomes lower and less
distinct posteriorly, gradually moving towards the gently undulating
dorsal margin of the bone as the prearticular intervenes. @Andrews1910
thought that the surangular formed a portion of the internal wall of the
alveolar groove; this is in addition to the dentary so that the
surangular does not have any indentation from the tooth placement. A
small part of the splenial is in contact with the surangular, but
posteriorly, this is usurped by the prearticular. The ventral margin is
more simple as the sheet of the splenial simply curves around the
angular, a sliver of which can be seen in lateral view. Posteriorly, the
splenial narrows dorsoventrally into a point lying against the angular,
with its ventral margin fitting into a small groove. Dorsally on this
taper, there is a small anteroventrally-aligned notch directed towards a
small foramen, possibly for passage of the *chorda tympani* branch of
the VII nerve [@Kirton1983].

[\[OicenicusSurangular\]]{#OicenicusSurangular
label="OicenicusSurangular"}

The large surangular forms much of the posterior part of the mandible,
between the angular, prearticular and articular (see
[\[OicenicusAngular,OicenicusPrearticular,OicenicusArticular\]](#OicenicusAngular,OicenicusPrearticular,OicenicusArticular){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusAngular,OicenicusPrearticular,OicenicusArticular"}),
as well as sharing the jaw articulation with the articular (e.g.  NHMUK
PV R2180, [\[pl14\]](#pl14){reference-type="ref" reference="pl14"}, figs
1, 2, 5, 6) and forming a major attachment for muscle groups
([\[fig:Oicenicus-jaw,pl12\]](#fig:Oicenicus-jaw,pl12){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-jaw,pl12"}, figs 3, 4). Much of its anterior
section is a vertical sheet, placed medial (internal) to the dentary,
which forms the lateral wall of the Meckelian canal. This is marked by a
ridge dorsal to a channel in the medial surface of the surangular that
is placed dorsally at its anterior, but becomes more centrally placed as
the surangular dorsoventrally widens posteriorly. Both the dorsal and
ventral margins are rounded, especially posteriorly, as the dentary and
angular respectively surround the surangular. The anterior extremity of
the surangular is unknown. Another groove (the *fossa surangularis*)
runs along the lateral face of the surangular ventral to the dentary and
is pitted by foramina that pass through the bone and into the Meckelian
canal, allowing passage of nerves and blood vessels. These nerves and
vessels emerge medially through an elongate, ventrally placed foramen.
Posteriorly, this groove becomes discontinuous and is reduced to several
pits of the foramina.

The surangular is held between the dentary (laterally) and the splenial
(medially) for much of its length; although some evidence of the extent
of contact can be seen, there are no well-developed facets. Posterior to
the termination of the alveolar groove, the surangular becomes more
robust. The dorsal margin is drawn up dorsally into a low, rounded
paracoronoid process, to which the *M. adductor mandibulae internus
pseudotemporalis* division was attached [@Kirton1983]. Posterior to the
paracoronoid process, the dorsal margin of the surangular is raised into
a sharper, dorsomedially directed preglenoid process. Striations cover
this process on its medial surface and over a rounded ridge situated
posteroventrally, likely indicating attachment area of the *M. adductor
mandibulae externus* group (hence is termed the "M.A.M.E. process" by
[@Fischer2012 14]; [@Kirton1983]). @Andrews1910 considered these two
processes together to be the functional equivalent of the coronoid
process, the coronoid being non-ossified or lost (see
[\[OicenicusCoronoid\]](#OicenicusCoronoid){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusCoronoid"}). The dorsal margin is excavated
posterior to these processes, marking the location of the jaw glenoid.
Posterior to the paracoronoid and preglenoid processes, the dorsal
margin of the surangular is deflected laterally and the medial face
excavated slightly to form the glenoid fossa. The surface of this area
is roughened for the application of the articular cartilage that would
have rotated against the anterior boss of the quadrate condyle; the
cartilage extended posteromedially onto the articular. Here, there may
be a tubercle developed [@Andrews1910]. As the angular broadens
dorsoventrally towards its posterior end, it covers much of the lateral
face of the surangular. The surangular is roughened for this contact,
and a low ridge may mark the dorsal line of contact. At its
posteriormost part, the surangular is roughened and the posterior margin
is crenate where the cartilage of the retroarticular process would have
covered it and the angular (see
[\[OicenicusAngular\]](#OicenicusAngular){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusAngular"}).

[\[OicenicusAngular\]]{#OicenicusAngular label="OicenicusAngular"}

The angular is an elongate bone that forms the ventral margin of much of
the mandible and the floor of the Meckelian canal
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Oicenicus-jaw,pl13\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Oicenicus-jaw,pl13){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Oicenicus-jaw,pl13"}, figs 1, 2,
[\[pl14\]](#pl14){reference-type="ref" reference="pl14"}). Anteriorly,
it is thin and narrow and excluded from view by the dentary and
splenial, which envelop the bone and meet ventrally. Along most of the
lower jaw, the angular is visible ventrally, and a narrow portion can be
seen mediolaterally. Ventrally, the margin is rounded and widens
posteriorly, whereas the dorsal margin is moulded into two deep grooves.
The more laterally placed groove holds the ventral margin of the
surangular and the medial groove forms the floor of the Meckelian canal,
which would be filled in life by the Meckelian cartilage. These two
grooves are bounded by high walls that ascend medially and laterally on
the angular, becoming higher towards the posterior end of the bone. A
third groove is placed ventrally on the medial face and holds the
ventral margin of the splenial; all three grooves continue along most of
the angular. The posterior of the angular curves slightly dorsally and
the lateral side ascends to cover much of the surangular (see
[\[OicenicusSurangular\]](#OicenicusSurangular){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusSurangular"}). Along its posterior margin, the
angular is finely crenate, like the surangular, where it was covered by
cartilage of the retroarticular process. Internally, the angular meets
the articular, the latter of which has two distinct facets for this
contact, and borders the prearticular also (see
[\[OicenicusPrearticular\]](#OicenicusPrearticular){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusPrearticular"}; [@Andrews1910]).

[\[OicenicusCoronoid\]]{#OicenicusCoronoid label="OicenicusCoronoid"}

The coronoid in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* is lost entirely. Because of
this, the muscle attachments of the coronoid process have shifted in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* to the paracoronoid process of the surangular
(see
[\[OicenicusSurangular\]](#OicenicusSurangular){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusSurangular"}). @Andrews1910 [p. 34, fig. 20]
identified the prearticular as the coronoid, however, its true identity
was not recognised until later [e.g. @Romer1956 212; @Kirton1983].
@Martill1987 also indicated the presence of a right coronoid in BUCCM
1983/1008, but again this likely represents the prearticular. It seems
that this element is notably reduced or absent in all ichthyosaur taxa
and so makes identification and comparison of this element problematic.
The position of the coronoid in the medial lower jaw also makes it
likely that any disturbance that would expose this bone may conspire to
remove it entirely.

[\[OicenicusPrearticular\]]{#OicenicusPrearticular
label="OicenicusPrearticular"}

The prearticular in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* was identified as the
coronoid by @Andrews1910 [see
[\[OicenicusCoronoid\]](#OicenicusCoronoid){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusCoronoid"}], but this was corrected by @Romer1956
[p. 212] and @Kirton1983
([\[fig:Oicenicus-jaw,pl13\]](#fig:Oicenicus-jaw,pl13){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-jaw,pl13"}, figs 3, 4). It is an elongate, thin
bone, which, coupled with its position in the middle of the mandible,
means that it is infrequently preserved and identified. The prearticular
forms a very thin medial wall of the Meckelian canal along much of its
length, tapering both dorsoventrally and laterally at its anterior end.
Its relationship with the angular is unclear, but it may insert into the
more medial groove alongside the Meckel's cartilage, or run along the
medial dorsal edge. Arching of the dorsal margin allows the prearticular
to contact the surangular for some distance dorsal to the Meckelian
canal. The prearticular is obscured from medial view by the splenial.
Posteriorly, the prearticular rises towards a peak that lies just
ventral to the paracoronoid process of the surangular in articulation
(see NHMUK PV R2180); this equates to the coronoid process, although it
does not function as such [@Andrews1910]. Posterior to this region, the
prearticular narrows dorsoventrally to form a bar that lies just against
the internal face of the medial flange of the angular, forming part of
the medial wall of the adductor fossa that separates the prearticular
from the surangular. The medial face is rugose and this spreads
ventrally onto the angular, possibly marking the insertion of a medial
portion of the *M. adductor mandibulae internus pterygoideus* division
[@Haas1973; @Kirton1983]; similar relations are seen in extant lizards
and *Sphenodon*. At its most posterior part, the prearticular covers the
ventral edge of the articular.

[\[OicenicusArticular\]]{#OicenicusArticular label="OicenicusArticular"}

This compact and posteriorly rounded bone is found at the posterior of
the mandible and forms the posterior surface of the jaw articulation
with the quadrate condyle
([\[fig:Oicenicus-jaw,pl14\]](#fig:Oicenicus-jaw,pl14){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-jaw,pl14"}). It is held by the surangular
laterally and the angular and prearticular ventrally so that the ovoid
anterior surface is angled slightly dorsally and medially
([\[fig:Oicenicus-jawmed\]](#fig:Oicenicus-jawmed){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-jawmed"}). This surface meets the articular
facet of the quadrate and is slightly concave and pitted for the
articular cartilage that would spread between it and the glenoid on the
surangular just anterior to the articular. The long axis of this ovoid
face aligns with the long axis of the posterior boss of the quadrate, to
which it articulates. Ventrally, the articular would have been continued
anteriorly by the mandibular cartilage and is pitted for its
application. The lateral face is flattened where it meets the surangular
laterally, and has a horizontal groove in its middle section that
follows the contours of the underlying bone. @Andrews1910 noted that two
facets are present ventrally for contact with the medial face of the
angular. The medial face is slightly roughened and is saddle shaped;
convex dorsoventrally and anteroposteriorly concave. Ventrally this face
is roughened for overlap by the prearticular whereas the dorsal margin
is much thinner and closely applied to the surangular laterally. The
posterior of the articular is round and roughened and continued in
cartilage that extended into a short and rounded retroarticular process
[@Kirton1983].

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: anterior right
(**a, b**), middle left (**c, d**) and middle right (**e**) position
teeth (from GLAHM V1129) in mesial (**, ,** ), distolingual () and
distal () views. Abbreviations: **ce**, cementum; **cr**, crown; **de**,
smooth dentine covered by acellular cementum; **ra**, root abnormality;
**rp**, resorption pit; **wf**, wear facet. Scale bar represents 10 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-teeth\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-teeth
label="fig:Oicenicus-teeth"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-teeth.png "fig:"){#fig:Oicenicus-teeth}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-toothantmes\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-toothantmes
label="fig:Oicenicus-toothantmes"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-toothantdislin\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-toothantdislin
label="fig:Oicenicus-toothantdislin"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-toothmidmes\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-toothmidmes
label="fig:Oicenicus-toothmidmes"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-toothmiddislin\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-toothmiddislin
label="fig:Oicenicus-toothmiddislin"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-toothmidrdislin\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-toothmidrdislin
label="fig:Oicenicus-toothmidrdislin"}

[\[OicenicusDentition\]]{#OicenicusDentition label="OicenicusDentition"}

The dentition of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* has long been problematic:
the size of the teeth and their poor attachment has meant that few
specimens have been recovered with teeth in position, or even with teeth
present at all ([1.12](#fig:Oicenicus-teeth){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-teeth"}). Early descriptions noted the small
size of the teeth and that they might have been restricted to the
anterior of the rostrum despite there being well-developed alveolar
grooves along the whole of each jaw ramus (see
[\[OicenicusPremaxilla,OicenicusMaxilla,OicenicusDentary\]](#OicenicusPremaxilla,OicenicusMaxilla,OicenicusDentary){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusPremaxilla,OicenicusMaxilla,OicenicusDentary"};
[@Lydekker1889; @Andrews1907; @Andrews1910]). @Gasparini1988 described
*'Ophthalmosaurus monocharactus'* with several teeth present in the
maxilla (figs 2a & 3a), however, this taxon is not consistent with
*Ophthalmosaurus* [@Maisch2000c 89]. @Kirton1983 considered
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* to have approximately 40 teeth in each jaw
ramus based on tooth counts on NHMUK PV R3893 and from the impressions
in NHMUK PV R4753 and GLAHM V1129. My own (BCM) examination of these
specimens shows these to be minimum estimates: in each, teeth may be
missing or impressions indistinct, but all can be confidently referred
to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* based upon associated diagnostic material.
NHMUK PV R3893 has at least 27 premaxillary teeth or impressions in each
ramus, with the anteriormost tip of the premaxilla missing; it is
unlikely that the true count would have been much higher. In GLAHM
V1921, the tooth impressions are more distinct along the whole of the
maxilla and dentary; this specimen had 23 teeth in the maxilla and
probably 48 (more than 44) dentary teeth. The maxilla in NHMUK PV R3893
is incomplete posteriorly, but held at least 12 teeth in its anterior
portion. This brings the total number of teeth in each jaw ramus to
around 50.

In *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, the teeth are small, especially compared
to other ichthyosaurs, with the largest held towards the middle of each
alveolar groove. Tooth size rapidly decreases approaching each end of
the groove as it narrows; this is clearest anteriorly where the small
teeth were held in defined sockets (see
[\[OicenicusPremaxilla,OicenicusDentary\]](#OicenicusPremaxilla,OicenicusDentary){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusPremaxilla,OicenicusDentary"}). @Kirton1983
estimated the largest tooth (an incomplete tooth from GLAHM V1129) to be
37.3 mm high apicobasally and 11.4 mm maximum diameter across the root,
no larger teeth were found. Few specimens allow the calculation of
McGowan's [-@McGowan1976 p. 677] tooth index (10 × crown length of
highest tooth/jaw length); Kirton's [-@Kirton1983 p. 70] values were
found to be correct for NHMUK PV R2180, R2181 and GLAHM V1129: 0.140,
0.216 and 0.183 respectively. Higher values are found for smaller
individuals: NHMUK PV R2181 has relatively large teeth that lie in
contact with those alongside; that these teeth point slightly distally
[@Andrews1910] might be due to post-mortem displacement.

The teeth are slightly curved, making the lingual side shorter than the
labial side. The bulbous base forms about two-thirds of the total height
and is compressed transversely, making the base slender and
sub-quadrangular [@Fischer2011c character 3]. This differs from
*Brachypterygius*
([\[BextremusDentition\]](#BextremusDentition){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusDentition"}), *Platypterygius*
([1.6.21](#tax:comp:Platypterygius){reference-type="ref"
reference="tax:comp:Platypterygius"}; [@McGowan1972]), and
*Undorosaurus* ([1.6.27](#tax:comp:Undorosaurus){reference-type="ref"
reference="tax:comp:Undorosaurus"}; [@Efimov1999a]), in which the tooth
bases are bulbous and quadrangular, suggesting that the condition is not
homologous between these taxa. There was no bony attachment between the
tooth base and the alveolar groove; the placement of the teeth in the
alveolar groove refers *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* to the aulacodont
dentition of @Mazin1983 and @Motani1997a The root is covered by cementum
that is thinly striated longitudinally by the underlying plication of
the tooth. In this region, the infolding dentine disturbs and breaks up
the pulp cavity and the tooth base assumes bulbous appearance
[@Schultz1969; @Kirton1983]. In NHMUK PV R3893, some replacement teeth
are present and there is resorption of the tooth roots. The replacement
teeth develop lingually and lie in an elongate resorption pit on this
side of the mature tooth root. Apically from the base, the tooth is much
smoother, thinly coated by acellular cementum
[@Andrews1910; @Kirton1983; @Maxwell2011; @Maxwell2012d], and the
cementum is only faintly marked by striations that are continuous with
the crown. This acellular region is visually separated from the crown by
the well-defined base of the enamel [@Fischer2011c character 2], which
forms a clear line around the tooth. The enamelled crown is a straight
cone, circular in cross section, Massare's [-@Massare1987] 'pierce'
guild, with a pointed tip and has further longitudinal striations on the
enamel that are less distinct and finer than on the tooth base. Wear
facets in NHMUK PV R2181 and GLAHM V1129 are found on the distal and
mesial side, likely from abrasion as the interlocking teeth of the upper
and lower jaws were brought together [@Kirton1983]. Further isolated
teeth have been assigned to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, but their
generic nature means that it is impossible to be certain that they
derive from this species.

[\[OicenicusHyoid\]]{#OicenicusHyoid label="OicenicusHyoid"}

Few examples of the hyoid apparatus are known from *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, or from ichthyosaurs generally. The hyoid apparatus consists
of a pair of curved and transversely compressed, rod-like bones that
would be medial to the jaw rami [@McGowan1973], but whose exact
placement is uncertain. Each end of the hyoid bone is flattened to form
an elongate, elliptical surface that is pitted for the application of
cartilage. @Kirton1983 discussed the homology of these bones, which had
been designated the cornu hyale by @Sollas1916 and @McGowan1973. As this
bone is not ossified in reptiles [@Romer1956], @Kirton1983 instead
homologised the paired hyoid bones with the cornu branchiale I (=
ceratobranchial I), which are ossified and have a similar form (curved
rods) to the bones in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. @Sollas1916 recreated
a complex hyoid apparatus, most likely due to disarticulation in the
posterior part of the specimen that he sectioned.

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: atlas-axis complex
(GLAHM V1916) in anterior (**a**), posterior (**b**), left lateral
(**c**) and right lateral (**d**) views. Abbreviations: **dat**, atlas
diapophysis; **dax**, axis diapophysis; **fna**, neural arch facets on
the atlas-axis; **nat**, atlas neural spine; **nax**, axis neural spine;
**nc**, neural canal; **pat**, atlas parapophysis; **pax**, axis
parapophysis. Scale bar represents 50 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-atlasaxis\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-atlasaxis
label="fig:Oicenicus-atlasaxis"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-atlas-axis.png "fig:"){#fig:Oicenicus-atlasaxis}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-ataxant\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-ataxant
label="fig:Oicenicus-ataxant"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-ataxpos\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-ataxpos
label="fig:Oicenicus-ataxpos"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-ataxllat\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-ataxllat
label="fig:Oicenicus-ataxllat"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-ataxrlat\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-ataxrlat
label="fig:Oicenicus-ataxrlat"}

[\[OicenicusAtlasaxis\]]{#OicenicusAtlasaxis label="OicenicusAtlasaxis"}

The atlas and axis centra are fused to each other even in the youngest
individuals known; a low vertical ridge marks the remnant of their
separation along the side of the centra
([\[fig:Oicenicus-atlasaxis,pl15\]](#fig:Oicenicus-atlasaxis,pl15){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-atlasaxis,pl15"}). Together the complex has a
triangular shape in anteroposterior view, tapering ventrally. The
anterior face of the atlas is concave for articulation with the
hemispherical boss of the basioccipital, with a central pit in many
specimens, although the anterior face becomes more convex marginally.
Unlike the posterior face of the axis, the anterior surface of the atlas
is slightly irregular, likely indicating where cartilage would have
intervened between the atlas and the basioccipital. This extends around
the anterior face, giving the lateral faces a small anterior rim of
unfinished bone, and further dorsolaterally onto the articulation
surfaces with the neural arches and ribs. Anteroventrally, the atlas is
bevelled (seen well in lateral view), and this might have accommodated a
separate atlantal intercentrum [@Kirton1983]. The irregular surface here
continues onto a ventral cartilage-covered ridge that might have
extended along the first three or four centra (indicated by similarly
rounded and roughened ventral portions). The neural canal is formed by a
shallow channel dorsally on the centrum that is finished in smooth bone
and slightly raised dorsal to the surrounding pitted bone. Lateral to
this, paired pedicels mark the articulation with the atlantal and axial
neural arches; the interior of these facets are slightly excavated to
form a clear rim. The lateral faces of the atlas and axis are each
slightly concave between the anterior and posterior rims and the ridge
marking the suture between the atlas-axis. In lateral view, the axis
appears slightly shorter than the atlas. Placed dorsally, the rib facets
are poorly defined and vary both between individuals and between the
right and left sides of a single specimen (e.g.  GLAHM V1916;
[1.13](#fig:Oicenicus-atlasaxis){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-atlasaxis"}). The diapophyses are broad, pitted
areas, subtriangular in shape, placed dorsally and anteriorly on both
the atlas and axis and are often confluent with the neural arch facets.
The parapophyses form lower, rounded plinths that are situated towards
the posterior margins of the atlas and axis. @Kirton1983 noted that the
diapophysis and parapophysis may amalgamate into a poorly defined,
raised surface of pitted bone ( GLAHM V1061 and V1611). These features
arise from the low degree of ossification, particularly around the
anterior articular surfaces. The posterior face of the axis is more
deeply concave than the anterior face of the atlas, and also smoother
and more sharply defined. The posterior articular face of the axis is
smaller than the anterior face of the atlas, and tapers greatly
ventrally. This occurs gradually through the whole complex so that the
axis forms a narrow ventromedial keel, giving the bone a heart shape in
posterior view, and this is continued caudally by the next centrum. An
axial intercentrum ossification does not seem to have been present.
Together, the atlas-axis complex has a slight posterodorsal inclination,
so that the more posterior centra are more dorsally positioned and
continue the rise towards the trunk.

The atlas and axis neural arches and spines are about one-half and
two-thirds the height of their centra respectively, lower than the more
posterior cervical and dorsal neural spines; both are unfused to the
centra. Unlike all more posterior neural arches, the atlantal neural
arch is ossified in two halves that are in contact medially; all other
arches are fused along the midline
([1.13](#fig:Oicenicus-atlasaxis){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-atlasaxis"}; *contra*
[@Andrews1910; @Kirton1983]). Each half of the atlantal neural arch is
composed of a robust ventral column that is rounded ventrally for
articulation with the centrum. This pedicel is deflected medially and
narrows into the blade-like neural spine, which meets its counterpart
medially. Between the two sides, the articular surface is a broad
flattened area, separated from the ventral column by an oblique ridge.
This is separated from the more posterior portion of the surface that
forms the overlap with the axial neural spine by a faint, subvertical
ridge. The columnar part of the arch forks around the neural spine
providing surfaces anteriorly and posteriorly for the zygapophyses. A
small anterior tubercle might have articulated with a proatlas
[@Kirton1983]. Posteriorly, the two halves of the neural spine remain
deeply separated and the postzygapophyses are elongate and slightly
curved. In articulation, the atlas and axis neural arches overlap
distinctly, but do not fuse, unlike in *Ophthalmosaurus natans*
[@Druckenmiller2010 character 26]. The axial neural spine is fused
medially, but retains a pronounced medial ridge and deeply split
posterior edge that allows great overlap of the third cervical vertebral
neural arch. Its form is similar to the atlas neural arch, but is
taller, particularly in the spine, and has more highly developed
zygapophyses. These begin to take the form found through much of the
rest of the vertebral column: large elliptical surfaces raised dorsal to
the neural spine, although each side remains clearly separate from the
other. At its distal tip, the axial spine is grooved where cartilage
would have capped it. The atlantal and axial neural spines are
noticeably posteriorly deflected, more so than in more posterior neural
arches.

[\[OicenicusVertebralcolumn\]]{#OicenicusVertebralcolumn
label="OicenicusVertebralcolumn"}

The vertebral column of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* shows weak
regionalisation in the size and shape of the centra
([1.14](#fig:Oicenicus-vertratios){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-vertratios"}). No specimen shows the entirety
of the vertebral column: the small, posterior fluke centra are
frequently lost, and many other specimens have been crushed to some
extent or disarticulated so that the true positions are lost.
@Kirton1983 identified CAMSM J63920--64037 as the most complete
exemplar, while @Buchholtz2001 described PETMG R340 as complete from
anterior to the mid-fluke region; it is likely that *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* had a total of around 130 vertebrae. Regional division of the
column is hampered by the continuous and variable positions of the
neural arch and rib facets, but is generally split into two portions:
presacral and caudal, based upon the position of the ilium
[@McGowan2003]. The caudal region may be further subdivided with the
position of the tailbend -- the apical region -- separating the anterior
preflexural portion of the tail from the posterior postflexural portion.
As the pelvic girdle is not sutured to the vertebral column, the
position of the sacral region can be difficult to determine.
@Andrews1910 used the point at which the diapophysis and parapophysis
join to mark the first 'caudal' vertebra as a reference. This might not
be the true position of the sacrum, although @Kirton1983 proposed it lay
around the 42^nd^ vertebra as there is a sudden increase in central
height in this region in adult specimens. @Buchholtz2001 suggested a
count of around 39 presacral vertebrae, using neural canal width; a
method derived from measurements on other ichthyosaurs. @Appleby1956
further separated the 'cervical' vertebrae, those up to where the neural
arch facet and diapophysis lose contact, some 20--25 vertebrae, which
extend posterior to the pectoral girdle. McGowan & Motani's
[-@McGowan2003] terminology is employed in the description of the
vertebral column. Additionally, the presacral vertebrae are divided
based upon contact between the neural arch facet and diapophysis into
anterior (contact is present) and posterior (contact is absent)
portions, Kirton's [-@Kirton1983] anterior and posterior trunk vertebrae
respectively. Thunnosaurian ichthyosaurs mostly have around 40--45
presacral vertebrae, but this is greater in mixosaurids, which have
45--50, and up to 60 in *Cymbospondylus petrinus* [@Merriam1908]. The
length of the vertebral column, and the distinctiveness of the
vertebrae, particularly centra, means that these are the most commonly
occurring ichthyosaur elements. In some places, vertebrae are the only
incidence of ichthyosaur material
[@Huene1931a; @Huene1936; @Kuhn-Schnyder1980]. Early research frequently
used slight differences in vertebral morphology, often attributable to
intraspecific or intracolumnar variation of form along the axis, to
define taxa [e.g. @Owen1840; @Phillips1871]; many of these are now
considered invalid (see [1.5.2](#Taxainvalida){reference-type="ref"
reference="Taxainvalida"}).

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: vertebral centrum
height/length ratios for PETMG R340, OUMNH J50496 (anterior presacral
region) and CAMSM J65093--J65140 (caudal portion). Data for PETMG R340
from @Buchholtz2001.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-vertratios\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-vertratios
label="fig:Oicenicus-vertratios"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-vertebral-ratios.pdf){#fig:Oicenicus-vertratios
width="\\textwidth"}

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: anterior (**a, b**)
and posterior (**c, d**) presacral vertebral centra (GLAHM V1916) in
anterior (**a, c**) and left lateral (**b, d**) views. Abbreviations:
**cd**, central depression; **dp**, diapophysis; **fna**, neural arch
facet on the centrum; **nc**, neural canal; **pp**, parapophysis. Scale
bar represents 50 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-presacralvert\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-presacralvert
label="fig:Oicenicus-presacralvert"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-presacral-vertebrae.png "fig:"){#fig:Oicenicus-presacralvert}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-antpsvertant\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-antpsvertant
label="fig:Oicenicus-antpsvertant"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-antpsvertpos\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-antpsvertpos
label="fig:Oicenicus-antpsvertpos"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-pospsvertant\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-pospsvertant
label="fig:Oicenicus-pospsvertant"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-pospsvertpos\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-pospsvertpos
label="fig:Oicenicus-pospsvertpos"}

[\[OicenicusPresacralvertebrae\]]{#OicenicusPresacralvertebrae
label="OicenicusPresacralvertebrae"}

Around 40 presacral vertebrae are present in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*,
based upon estimates of the pelvic girdle position (39--42;
[@Kirton1983; @Buchholtz2001]), which occurs just anterior to where the
diapophysis and parapophysis join (approximately at vertebra 45:
[@Andrews1910]) (; ). The centra immediately posterior to the atlas-axis
rapidly decrease in height, but posterior to the axis there is a gradual
increase in centrum height throughout the presacral column
([1.14](#fig:Oicenicus-vertratios){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-vertratios"}; [@Buchholtz2001]). The centra
become slightly longer towards the middle of the presacral region,
around vertebra 25. The centra of the few vertebrae directly posterior
to the atlas-axis complex are similarly heart-shaped: keeled ventrally
and more square dorsally. This keel rapidly becomes less well developed
on more caudal vertebrae, so that by vertebrae six to eight the centrum
is almost circular; this keel may have formed the attachment point for
sub-vertebral muscles [@Kirton1983].

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: anterior presacral
vertebra centra 1--7 (GLAHM V1611) in left lateral (**a**) and ventral
(**b**) views. Abbreviations: **at**, atlas-axis complex; **dp**,
diapophysis; **fus**, ridge marking the line of fusion between the atlas
and axis; **k**, ventral keel on anterior vertebral centra; **pit**,
pits marking paths of vessels; **pp**, parapophysis. Scale bar
represents 50 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-anteriorvert\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-anteriorvert
label="fig:Oicenicus-anteriorvert"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-anterior-vertebrae.png "fig:"){#fig:Oicenicus-anteriorvert}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-antvertlat\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-antvertlat
label="fig:Oicenicus-antvertlat"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-antvertven\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-antvertven
label="fig:Oicenicus-antvertven"}

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: middle presacral
vertebral centra (GLAHM V1611) showing transition from 'cervical' to
'dorsal' regions by separation of the neural arch facet and diapophysis:
(**a**) centra 22--27 in left lateral view and (**b**) centrum 27 in
ventral view. Abbreviations: **dp**, diapophysis; **k**, ventral keel;
**pit**, pits marking paths of vessels; **pp**, parapophysis. Scale bar
represents 50 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-middlevert\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-middlevert
label="fig:Oicenicus-middlevert"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-middle-vertebrae.png "fig:"){#fig:Oicenicus-middlevert}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-midvertlat\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-midvertlat
label="fig:Oicenicus-midvertlat"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-midvertven\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-midvertven
label="fig:Oicenicus-midvertven"}

Posterior to the reduction of the ventral keel, the presacral vertebrae
are discoidal throughout the rest of the series; the anterior and
posterior faces are straight-sided in lateral view. Each centrum is
strongly amphicoelous, with small pits placed centrally, but the face of
the anterior and posterior face concavities is convex, so that vertebral
centrum has an hourglass-shape in sagittal cross-section. This form is
typical of post-Triassic ichthyosaurs, and similar vertebrae have been
figured by @Kiprijanoff1881 [pl. 1 @Fraas1891 pl. 14, figs 5b, 6b].
Ventral to the neural canal, the centrum is slightly thickened to form a
triangular convexity that is separate from the more continuous
convex-concave face that forms the rest of the centrum depression. This
convexity is indistinct, extending from the centre of the centrum face,
and is bounded by two slight grooves that are directed towards each of
the neural arch facets dorsolaterally. That this is present across
several vertebrae and specimens suggests that this is not a form of
pathology [@Stepanov2004]. The thickening of the centrum would have
resisted the compressive forces applied to the vertebral column
[@Kirton1983]. Dorsally, the centrum has a wide longitudinal canal that
forms the floor of the neural canal. The surface of the floor of the
neural canal is roughened, with longitudinal striations. The neural
canal is bordered laterally by the two neural arch facets, which are
raised dorsal to the neural canal to form pedestals. These facets are
narrow but anteroposteriorly elongate, extending from the anterior to
posterior margin on the dorsal surface, with a deep concavity centrally
into which the neural spine was located. The surface of the neural arch
facet is pitted as cartilage would have intervened in the articulation.
Laterally from the convexities, the neural arch facets in the anterior
*c.* 25 vertebral centra are confluent with the diapophysis of the
bicipital rib facet (see
[\[OicenicusRibs\]](#OicenicusRibs){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusRibs"}). The diapophysis is positioned towards the
anterior of the centrum and takes the form of a large, raised, and
rounded articulation. The surface of the diapophysis is pitted for
application of cartilage, continued from the neural arch facet medially.
The size of the diapophysis in these anterior centra, where it is
confluent with the neural arch facet, gives the dorsal portion of the
centrum a slightly square shape in anterior or posterior view; this is
particularly evident in the centra immediately following the atlas-axis
complex. Around vertebra 25, the diapophysis begins to separate from the
neural arch facet. The parapophysis, the ventral articulation of the
bicipital rib facet, is a smaller tubercle that is positioned about
halfway down the lateral centrum, against the anterior margin in the
anterior vertebrae; its surface is also pitted for the application of
cartilage. This tubercle migrates posteriorly on the lateral face of the
centrum up to vertebra 25, but maintains connection with the anterior
margin by a low, roughened ridge. The lateral and ventral faces of the
centrum are continuous and anteroposteriorly concave throughout. This
concavity is accentuated by the anterior and posterior margins forming
raised lips that border the lateral and ventral surfaces. The lateral
and ventral surfaces are smooth and pitted by numerous nutritive
foramina. Between approximately vertebrae 25 and 38, the diapophysis,
separate from the neural arch facet, and parapophysis rapidly migrate
ventrally on the side of the centrum to the ventrolateral corner, and
become slightly closer to each other. In the last few of these
vertebrae, the rib facets maintain their separation.

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: presacral--caudal
transitional vertebral centra 39--44 (GLAHM V1611) in left lateral view,
showing the fusion of the diapophysis and parapophysis into the
synapophysis. Abbreviations: **dp**, diapophysis; **pit**, pits marking
paths of vessels; **pp**, parapophysis; **r**, ridge between
parapophysis/synapophysis and anterior margin of the vertebral centrum;
**sp**, synapophysis. Scale bar represents
50 mm.](./img/fig-Oicenicus-posterior-vertebrae.png){#fig:Oicenicus-pospresacral-caudalvert}

Posterior to vertebra 39, the diapophysis shrinks and migrates ventrally
towards the parapophysis, joining with it to form an
anterodorsally--posteroventrally elongate synapophysis around vertebrae
42--43; Kirton's [-@Kirton1983] definition of the presacral/caudal
boundary. At this point, the ribs become unicipital (see
[\[OicenicusRibs\]](#OicenicusRibs){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusRibs"}). In the posterior presacral to anterior
caudal regions, with the rib articulations placed ventrolaterally, the
ventral margin of the centrum is much straighter than in the more
anterior and posterior centra. In the aforementioned region, the ventral
edges of the centra begin to develop a low, keel-like ridge along the
midline. This keel becomes more strongly developed in posterior
vertebrae, particularly into the caudal series (see
[\[OicenicusCaudalvertebrae\]](#OicenicusCaudalvertebrae){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusCaudalvertebrae"}), but between about vertebrae
29--36, the keel is divided by a median groove [@Kirton1983]. Some
specimens preserve lithified intercentral discs along with the bony
vertebrae; these would have likely been poorly ossified or cartilaginous
in life. The intercentral discs are thin and biconvex, moulding the
amphicoelous nature of the centra. They would have filled the space
between the vertebrae, but would not have created any large separation
between vertebrae: the margin of the centrum faces would likely have
been nearly in contact. This would have allowed little movement over
much of the vertebral column, which would have prevented the majority of
the skeleton from participating in axial propulsion. Similar
intercentral discs have been reported in *Ophthalmosaurus natans*, which
increase in length posteriorly -- separating the vertebral centra -- to
the middle caudal region, decreasing further posteriorly [@Massare2006].
It is uncertain whether this was the case in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*,
however, *Acamptonectes densus* shows 'locking' of the
[S]{.sans-serif}-shaped vertebral facets in the cervical and dorsal
regions [@Fischer2012].

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: anterior neural
arches and spines (GLAHM V1894) 1--6 in left lateral view (**a**) and 1,
2, 4 and 6 respectively in anterior (**b--e**) and posterior (**f--i**)
views. Only the right half of the atlantal neural spine is shown in
**b** and **f**. Abbreviations: **ats**, atlas neural spine; **axs**,
axis neural spine; **fc**, central facet on the neural arch; **fus**,
line of fusion between right and left sides of arch and spine; **na**,
neural arch; **nc**, neural canal; **ns**, neural spine; **poz**,
postzygapophysis; **pre**, prezygapophysis. **Dashed lines** mark
complete element outlines. Scale bar represents 50 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-anteriornspines\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-anteriornspines
label="fig:Oicenicus-anteriornspines"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-anterior-nspines.png){#fig:Oicenicus-anteriornspines}

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: middle presacral to
middle caudal (left to right) neural spines and arches (GLAHM V1916) in
left lateral (**a--f**), anterior (**g--l**) and posterior (**m--r**)
views. Abbreviations: **fc**, central facet on the neural arch; **fus**,
line of fusion between right and left sides of arch and spine; **g**,
dorsal groove on the neural spine; **na**, neural arch; **nc**, neural
canal; **ns**, neural spine; **poz**, postzygapophysis; **prz**,
prezygapophysis. Incomplete portions indicated by dashed line. Scale bar
represents 50 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-posteriornspines\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-posteriornspines
label="fig:Oicenicus-posteriornspines"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-posterior-nspines.png){#fig:Oicenicus-posteriornspines
width="\\textwidth"}

The neural arches too retain a similar form through much of the
presacral region, taking the form of tall, squared projections that are
deflected slightly posteriorly
([\[fig:Oicenicus-anteriornspines,fig:Oicenicus-posteriornspines,pl18\]](#fig:Oicenicus-anteriornspines,fig:Oicenicus-posteriornspines,pl18){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-anteriornspines,fig:Oicenicus-posteriornspines,pl18"}).
Caudal to the atlas-axis complex, they rapidly increase in height until
vertebra six. These first few neural arches resemble the arches of the
atlas-axis complex, with rather narrow bases and slightly posteriorly
deflected neural spines. In lateral view, the arches are formed by the
anteroposteriorly elongate columns, more widely separated than in the
atlas-axis complex, that have slightly convex and roughened bases for
articulation with the neural arch facets on the centra. Dorsal to this
articulation, the arches rapidly converge towards the midline, enclosing
the neural canal ventrally and meeting at less than one-quarter of the
height of the neural spine. The prezygapophyses and postzygapophyses are
positioned largely dorsal to the neural arch and canal, but the
ventralmost portion does diverge around the dorsal of the neural arch.
Longitudinally, along its posterior margin, the neural spine is grooved,
possibly marking the point of fusion of separate ossification centres
[@Kirton1983], into which the sharp ridge of the anterior margin of the
following neural spine slots. This creates a sharp midline peak
longitudinally in the roof of the neural canal that divides the pre- and
postzygapophyses into two elongate articular areas just lateral to the
midline of the neural spine. The prezygapophyseal articulations face
anterodorsally, whereas the postzygapophyses face posteroventrally to
contact the prezygapophyses from the vertebra posteriorly. @Kirton1983
[80] suggested that the overlapping of these neural arches would have
restricted movement of the cervical region. The neural arch is thin and
elongate, with a square dorsal margin in lateral view. Dorsally, along
the entirety of the presacral portion of the axial column, the neural
spine is grooved longitudinally and would have been continued in
cartilage. Posterior to vertebra six, the margins of the neural arches
become more rounded, particularly towards the dorsal part of the neural
canal; there is little evidence of separate ossification of the lateral
halves. The lateral pedicels of the arches converge more rapidly dorsal
to the neural canal and the neural spine dorsally in this region is
narrower. Both the pre- and postzygapophyses are situated entirely
dorsal to the neural canal and meet at the midline. The ridges and
grooves found in the most anterior neural spines are reduced here. The
prezygapophyses are bilobate, retaining a median ridge and sightly
concave; the postzygapophyses are more completely joined, with a less
obvious median groove, and form a large elongate articular surface. In
the presacral vertebrae, the neural spines are deflected slightly
posteriorly relative to the vertical axis through the centrum; this
reflects the curved nature of the axis in creating the fusiform body
shape [@Kirton1983]. As the centrum length increases towards vertebra
25, so the length of the neural arches increases in lateral view, but
the neural spines decrease in height in more posterior vertebrae towards
the caudal region.

![image](./img/fig-Oicenicus-caudal-vertebrae-anterior.png)

[\[OicenicusCaudalvertebrae\]]{#OicenicusCaudalvertebrae
label="OicenicusCaudalvertebrae"}

From the point where the diapophysis and parapophysis join, the tail
vertebrae gradually change shape posteriorly towards the apical region
and caudal fluke
([\[fig:Oicenicus-antcaudalvert,fig:Oicenicus-apicalcentra,pl18\]](#fig:Oicenicus-antcaudalvert,fig:Oicenicus-apicalcentra,pl18){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-antcaudalvert,fig:Oicenicus-apicalcentra,pl18"}).
The centra in the anterior portion of the caudal series remain large,
with a similar form to the most posterior presacral centra, but become
shorter anteroposteriorly, so that they have a more discoidal form.
@Kirton1983 [81--82] interpreted this as allowing more flexibility and
as an important region in generating thrust during axial propulsion. As
the centra become shorter, the synapophysis takes up relatively more of
the anteroposterior length of the centrum. It eventually becomes
confluent with both the anterior and posterior margins of the centrum,
and is here somewhat thickened, so taking on an externally square shape,
although the articulation remains rounded. The ventrolateral keels on
the centra (see
[\[OicenicusPresacralvertebrae\]](#OicenicusPresacralvertebrae){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusPresacralvertebrae"}) become higher and narrow,
appearing sharper, in the more posterior vertebrae, with two foramina
piercing the surface between the keels by vertebra 50, each slightly
lateral to the midline. The anterior and posterior margins of the
centrum between these keels are narrow, but widen either side into what
@Kirton1983 [82] interpreted as facets for the haemal arches. These
facets become more pronounced by vertebra 60, whereas the keel becomes
reduced. From approximately vertebra 55, centrum height starts to
decrease, this decrease becoming much more rapid from vertebra 66
towards the caudal fluke. These centra, however, become proportionally
wider and the rib articulation migrates slightly dorsally up each side
of the centrum, towards the middle.

The apical region tail bend is created by a series of five modified,
procoelous vertebrae, around vertebrae 71--75, termed apical centra
[@McGowan2003]. This procoely is partially created by a strong rounding
of the centrum margins on both the anterior and posterior faces, but
each retains a central pit. The irregular surface of the apical
vertebrae suggests a large covering of these centra in cartilage. In
more strongly ossified individuals, the procoely becomes more pronounced
so that the anterior face of the centrum becomes strongly convex and
articulates with the posterior face of the preceding centrum in a
ball-and-socket joint that allows a great range of motion in the apical
region @Kirton1983. The first centrum in this series is sub-circular,
like the centra immediately anterior to it, but posteriorly, the centra
rapidly become narrower and [U]{.sans-serif}-shaped in anterior and
posterior views. Dorsally, the neural arch facets become more prominent,
and the neural canal between these facets narrows and deepens slightly
into a deep median channel, accentuating the overall
[U]{.sans-serif}-shape. Rib facets are present on the anterior three
apical centra only, halfway down the lateral faces and positioned
posteriorly, but with raised ridges connecting to both the anterior and
posterior margins of the centrum; all centra posterior to this lack rib
facets. In addition, these apical centra are slightly wedge-shaped, with
ventral margins shorter than the dorsal margins, creating distinct
ventral flexion, over several vertebrae, that separates the caudal fluke
vertebrae. @McGowan1989b [430] used trigonometry to measure the angle
subtended by each apical centrum in *Eurhinosaurus longirostris* and
*Leptonectes tenuirostris*, calculating values of 2--5° per centrum.
Similar calculations for *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* yield a more
constant value of about 1.5° in PETMG R340
([1.21](#fig:Oicenicus-apicalcentra){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-apicalcentra"}). However, as the centra are
more rounded in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, compared to wedges in the
above taxa, this might mean that the tail bend had a stronger
deflection, and greater overall mobility. Disarticulation of the
available material means that the true amount of deflection of the tail
fin is unknown. Posterior to the apical vertebrae, the centra of the
tail fin retain a [U]{.sans-serif}-shape, but become more flat faced,
the anterior and posterior faces are neither as concave as in the
anterior vertebrae, nor as convex as the tail bend centra. The caudal
fluke is supported ventrally by 50--60 vertebrae that decrease in size
posteriorly into tiny discs; the terminal elements become so small that
they are either not preserved or cannot be collected. Unlike the more
anterior centra, these are more completely ossified and sharply defined.
Many of these are aligned straight, with parallel anterior and posterior
margins in lateral view, but @Kirton1983 [85] identified distal elements
in CAMSM J63920--64037 that show a slight wedge shape, opposite to that
of the tail bend, indicating a distal recurve. There are no rib facets
present on these centra, but neural arch facets are present as dorsal
pedestals, with the neural canal running in between. The ventrally
raised areas, interpreted as haemal arch facets, persists throughout the
caudal region.

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: apical centra
71--74 (GLAHM V1916) in anterior view (**a--d**) and articulated in left
lateral view (**e**) showing the curve created. Abbreviations: **a**,
approximate tail bend angle; **cd**, central centrum depression;
**fha**, haemal arch facet; **fna**, neural arch facet; **nc**, neural
canal; **pm**, procoelous margin; **r**, rib; **sp**, synapophysis.
Scale bar represents 50 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-apicalcentra\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-apicalcentra
label="fig:Oicenicus-apicalcentra"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-tailbend.png){#fig:Oicenicus-apicalcentra}

Unlike the centra, the neural arches and spines rapidly decrease in
height in the anterior caudal region
([\[fig:Oicenicus-posteriornspines,fig:Oicenicus-apicalnspines\]](#fig:Oicenicus-posteriornspines,fig:Oicenicus-apicalnspines){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-posteriornspines,fig:Oicenicus-apicalnspines"}).
The arches become lower and the spines shorter so that the posterior
elements have a regular triradiate form. The pre- and postzygapophyses
decrease in size more anteriorly than the neural spine, and are reduced
to small, sub-circular areas positioned directly dorsal to the neural
canal. Most noticeably, the neural spines steadily become deflected more
posteriorly in the posterior caudal vertebrae as they are reduced, so
that both sets of zygapophyses are nearly horizontal by about vertebra
66 and the neural spine overlaps the spine of the more posterior
vertebra. Throughout the caudal region, the neural spines retain a
groove in the dorsal margin. In the apical region, the neural spines are
wider and strongly bulbous dorsally, with strongly roughened and pitted
surfaces, suggesting a large amount of ligamentous connective tissue
[@Kirton1983 84]. There is no development of the zygapophyses, and these
neural arches were unlikely to have been in contact, allowing motion in
the apical region. Few neural arches are preserved from vertebrae
posterior to the apical region, but these caudal fluke neural spines
show a similar, albeit diminishing, form. Neural arch facets are present
on the vertebral centra in much of the fluke region, but the respective
arches were likely very small and may have been lost, or possibly not
ossified. The lateral ventral keels, and associated thickening of the
centrum margins in the caudal region, interpreted as facets for the
haemal arches (see above), continues along much of the tail bend too. No
elements can be certainly identified as haemal arches, and these were
likely poorly ossified also, as supported by the poorly defined facets.

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: apical neural
arches 71--75 (GLAHM V1916) in anterior view (**a--e**) and left lateral
view (**f--j**). Abbreviations: **cc**, pitting indicating a cartilage
cap to the neural spine; **fc**, central facet on the neural arch;
**na**, neural arch; **nc**, neural canal; **ns**, neural spine;
**poz**, postzygapophysis; **prz**, prezygapophysis. Scale bar
represents 50 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-apicalnspines\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-apicalnspines
label="fig:Oicenicus-apicalnspines"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-tailbend-nspines.png){#fig:Oicenicus-apicalnspines}

![image](./img/fig-Oicenicus-ribs.png){width="19cm"}

[\[OicenicusRibs\]]{#OicenicusRibs label="OicenicusRibs"}

The ribs follow the same poor regionalisation as the vertebrae
([\[fig:Oicenicus-ribs\]](#fig:Oicenicus-ribs){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-ribs"}). Rib facets on the vertebral centra
show that ribs were present on all vertebrae up to the apical region, at
about the 73^rd^ vertebra. In the anterior region of the vertebral
column, the ribs possess two proximal heads: the tuberculum and
capitulum, articulating with the diapophysis and parapophysis on the
vertebral centra respectively. The tuberculum and capitulum are
flattened and pitted for application of cartilage. The large capitulum
is aligned with the proximal part of the rib shaft, whereas the
tuberculum is smaller and deflected dorsally, creating a
[Y]{.sans-serif}-shaped proximal dichotomy. In articulation, this means
that the proximal portion of the rib is angled dorsolaterally, before
curving ventrally in its distal portion. This gives *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* a broad body in anteroposterior view, which @McGowan2003 [19]
described as "barrel-chested". The dorsal and ventral margins of the rib
are roughened and would have provided attachment for muscles.
Proximally, the anterior rib shafts are strongly curved, but this
becomes less marked distally. The ribs are flattened anteroposteriorly
for much of their length, but become rounded distally. Longitudinal
grooves run for between one-half and two-thirds of the proximal length
of the rib on both the anterior and posterior faces, beginning at the
midline and moving towards the internal margin distally. In the
posterior presacral ribs, the tubercula are reduced and the two proximal
heads of the rib become closer. Between the tuberculum and capitulum, a
thin sheet of bone develops, similar in form to webbing between digits.
The ribs in this region also become shorter and less strongly curved;
distally, the ribs taper. On the anterior face, at the apex where the
capitulum and tuberculum separate, a small muscle tubercle is developed.
The tuberculum and capitulum finally join to form a single-headed rib,
with an elongate articulation, in the sacral region: around vertebra 43,
where the diapophysis and synapophysis join (see
[\[OicenicusPresacralvertebrae\]](#OicenicusPresacralvertebrae){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusPresacralvertebrae"}). There is no evidence for
connection with the pelvic girdle or specialisation of the ribs in this
region. The ribs of the caudal region are shorter and taper distally.
The proximal head of the rib is aligned slightly
posterodorsally--anteroventrally, and the rib is directed
ventrolaterally and slightly posteriorly. These ribs have a weakly
developed anterior groove and very poorly developed groove posteriorly;
the distal end is tipped by cartilage. At the posterior end of the
vertebral column, the ribs are shorter and develop as horizontally
flattened nubbins of bone, distally roughened and presumably finished in
cartilage
([\[fig:Oicenicus-ribs\]](#fig:Oicenicus-ribs){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-ribs"}).

[\[OicenicusGastralia\]]{#OicenicusGastralia label="OicenicusGastralia"}

Gastralia are uncommon in the material of the Leeds Collection, but
several examples from *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* are known. Fragments
are preserved in GLAHM V1916 and more complete examples are present in
NHMUK PV R8737. The gastralia are thin, gently curved rods of bone, with
diameters varying from 3.85--7.50 mm in the latter specimen. The lengths
of individual gastralia varies from around 150--290 mm, the longer ones
probably coming from the middle part of the torso. Each gastralium is
sub-circular in cross-section through its midpoint, but at each end
becomes flattened for articulation. The articulations between the
gastralia are ridged longitudinally and the elements here overlap. The
curve of the rod largely occurs in the middle third of its length, each
more distal portion being noticeably straighter. The larger gastralia
show a curve of 140--150° over their length, although the shorter
elements display smaller angles. Some elements show a reversing of the
curve distally. Although NHMUK PV R8737 preserves many gastralia, a
complete set cannot be reconstructed, and as the gastralia are
disarticulated, it is difficult to restore their true relationship to
the dorsal rib cage.

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: pectoral girdle
(NHMUK PV R2137) in anterior (**a**), dorsal (**b**) and left lateral
(**c**) views. Abbreviations: **ano**, anterior notch of the coracoid;
**cl**, clavicle; **co**, coracoid; **fgc**, glenoid facet of the
coracoid; **fgs**, glenoid facet of the scapula; **fsc**, scapular facet
of the coracoid; **ic**, interclavicle; **sc**, scapula; **t**, tubercle
on interclavicle. Scale bar represents 100 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-pectoral\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-pectoral
label="fig:Oicenicus-pectoral"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-pectoral-girdle.png "fig:"){#fig:Oicenicus-pectoral}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-pectoralant\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-pectoralant
label="fig:Oicenicus-pectoralant"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-pectoraldor\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-pectoraldor
label="fig:Oicenicus-pectoraldor"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-pectorallat\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-pectorallat
label="fig:Oicenicus-pectorallat"}

[\[OicenicusPectoralgirdle\]]{#OicenicusPectoralgirdle
label="OicenicusPectoralgirdle"}

The pectoral girdle in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* is large, robust, and
provided a large area for the attachment of musculature associated with
the large forelimbs (see ;
[1.23](#fig:Oicenicus-pectoral){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-pectoral"}). In spite of this, the bones of the
pectoral girdle would have been surrounded by a thick layer of cartilage
in life, and variable degrees of ossification has caused differences in
the morphology of these pectoral elements, particularly the coracoids
and scapulae [see @Maxwell2011b fig. 3]. This variation has reduced the
taxonomic utility of the pectoral elements, but as robust elements, they
are often found, and detailed description is warranted. @Maxwell2011b
have discussed the taxonomic utility of the pectoral girdle in other
Jurassic ichthyosaur taxa, concluding that the generic form of the
pectoral girdle found in ophthalmosaurids shows no phylogenetically
informative characters to this clade, and only four are applicable to
Parvipelvia [@Fernandez2007; @Fischer2013a].

[\[OicenicusClavicle\]]{#OicenicusClavicle label="OicenicusClavicle"}

The clavicles are elongate and curved, strap-like bones that meet
medially in a complex, interdigitating suture, but do not overlap
([\[fig:Oicenicus-pectoral,pl19\]](#fig:Oicenicus-pectoral,pl19){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-pectoral,pl19"}). @Seeley1874) did not think
that the clavicles met, but were separated, because the clavicles in the
holotype (NHMUK PV R2133) are incomplete medially. This contact between
the two clavicles is not complete, as the two clavicles diverge to
expose a tuberosity on the interclavicle (see
[\[OicenicusInterclavicle\]](#OicenicusInterclavicle){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusInterclavicle"}). There is no fusion between the two
clavicles at their midline, or with the underlying interclavicle, except
in the largest individuals (e.g.  NHMUK PV R3535). Where this does
occur, the closeness of the fusion makes it difficult to follow the
suture [@Kirton1983]. The anterior face of the clavicle is convex and
smooth along most of its surface, except anteromedially. It is likely
that there would have been many muscles connected here
[@Johnson1979; @Kirton1983], although there is no strong indication of
scarring on the surface. Medially, the clavicle is broad and straight,
but curves dorsally in its lateral portion. The distal portion narrows
greatly to form a tapering horn-like extension that curves dorsally to
meet the proximal scapula.

The posterior surface of the clavicle is deeply grooved medially and
would have been applied to the anterior face of the horizontal bar of
the interclavicle in life. The surface of the clavicle is roughened and
striated for this contact. Ventrally, the clavicle has a strongly raised
ridge that holds the ventral part of the horizontal bar of the
interclavicle. The posterior groove shallows laterally, particularly as
the clavicle is deflected dorsally into an irregular channel, into which
the acromion process of the scapula fits. Towards the lateral, horn-like
extension, the ventral edge is sharply angled laterally in some
specimens (e.g.  PETMG R220), but may be straighter in others (e.g. 
NHMUK PV R2149). A depression here fits onto the anterior edge of the
scapula, separated from the acromion facet anteriorly [@Appleby1956],
and the surface is roughened for contact with the scapula.

[\[OicenicusInterclavicle\]]{#OicenicusInterclavicle
label="OicenicusInterclavicle"}

In *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, the interclavicle is
[T]{.sans-serif}-shaped and sits posterior to the clavicular arch and
anterior to the coracoids
([\[fig:Oicenicus-pectoral,pl20\]](#fig:Oicenicus-pectoral,pl20){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-pectoral,pl20"}). The [T]{.sans-serif} of the
interclavicle consists of a transverse bar anteriorly, with a
posteriorly-directed medial stem. The stem is usually longer than the
transverse bar (e.g.  NHMUK PV R4753), although in some smaller, and
presumably juvenile specimens (e.g.  LEICT 100'1949/27) this is greatly
reduced; the latter specimen also has a median suture. Anteriorly, the
clavicles cover the transverse bar, which is convex to fit into the
posterior groove of the clavicles (see
[\[OicenicusClavicle\]](#OicenicusClavicle){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusClavicle"}) and each end tapers distally. The
surface of the interclavicle is roughened and grooved, corresponding to
the interior surface of the clavicle. A tuberosity is variably developed
on the midline of the interclavicle that protrudes through a gap between
the articulated clavicles. @Kirton1983 suggested this might have been a
point of muscle attachment to the forelimb. The ventral edge of the
transverse bar curves gently posteriorly to join the stem to the
transverse bar. This narrows slightly into a neck, but then widens
distally to form an elongate lateral flange. Proximally, the stem is
convex laterally, becoming flatter distally as it becomes wider
[@Andrews1910]. Around the distal flange, a small ridge demarcates the
edge, which tapers distally. The surface of this stem is roughened and
longitudinally striated, particularly distally, and may have been the
location for further muscle attachment. Along the midline of some
specimens (e.g.  NHMUK PV R4753), proximally, is a low median ridge that
extends for about one-third of the length of the stem of the
interclavicle; again this may have provided a point for muscle
attachment.

Internally, the anterior interclavicle is raised into a ridge dorsally
that fits into the posterior groove on the clavicular arch (see
[\[OicenicusClavicle\]](#OicenicusClavicle){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusClavicle"}. This creates a channel posterodorsally
along the transverse bar of the interclavicle that becomes less
pronounced distally. The surface of this channel is rugose, although the
posterior margin of the transverse bar may be smoother. Medially, the
channel narrows posteriorly into a groove along the stem of the
interclavicle, narrowing further in the neck. The surface of this groove
is strongly striated longitudinally, but the channel broadens distally,
and the striations cover the entirety of the distal flange. On this
surface, the roughening likely indicates the application of cartilage or
ligaments that intervened between the interclavicle and coracoid
[@Kirton1983]. Only in well-ossified individuals can a slight facet be
seen on the coracoid (see
[\[OicenicusCoracoid\]](#OicenicusCoracoid){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusCoracoid"}; [@Andrews1910; @Kirton1983]).

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: outlines of
referred coracoids in dorsal view: **a**, type specimen: NHMUK PV R2133;
**b**, LEICT 100'1949/20; **c**, holotype specimen of *Ophthalmosaurus
monocharactus* [Appleby, -@Appleby1956]: PETMG R220; **d**, GLAHM V1872.
Abbreviations: **ano**, anterior notch; **fcc**, coracoidal facet on the
coracoid; **fgc**, glenoid (humeral) facet on the coracoid; **fsc**,
scapular facet on the coracoid; **pi**, posterior invagination
('notch'). **Dashed lines** mark complete element outlines. Scale bar
represents 100 mm. [\[fig:Oicenicus-coracoid\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-coracoid
label="fig:Oicenicus-coracoid"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-coracoid-outlines.png){#fig:Oicenicus-coracoid}

[\[OicenicusCoracoid\]]{#OicenicusCoracoid label="OicenicusCoracoid"}

The coracoid, like the scapula, has a large variation in the degree of
ossification and resulting morphology
([\[fig:Oicenicus-pectoral,fig:Oicenicus-coracoid,pl20,pl21\]](#fig:Oicenicus-pectoral,fig:Oicenicus-coracoid,pl20,pl21){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-pectoral,fig:Oicenicus-coracoid,pl20,pl21"}).
The coracoid is a large, ovoid plate-like bone with a rounded
embayment-like notch laterally on the anterior border. Two broad and
oblique elongate facets are developed laterally and medially that give
this bone a saddle shape: concave mediolaterally and convex
anteroposteriorly. Almost the entire margin of the coracoidal plate is
roughened and pitted, and with a slight groove indicating that it was
likely surrounded by cartilage in life. Anteromedially, the coracoid
projects forward into a broad, rounded process, where the marginal
groove is particularly well developed. This portion of the coracoid, and
the surrounding cartilage, would have come close to, or been fully
articulated with the clavicles anteriorly (see
[\[OicenicusClavicle\]](#OicenicusClavicle){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusClavicle"}). Larger specimens have a triangular
pitted region that would contact with the median stem of the
interclavicle. The anterior notch forms lateral to this process,
separating it from the lateral articular facet. The bone of the margin
is smooth and rounded around the margin of the notch, unlike around the
rest of the coracoid. Neither the dorsal nor ventral surfaces of the
coracoid have any strong features on them. As mentioned above, they are
both gently warped between the medial and lateral facets into a saddle
shape. @Kirton1983 noted that the intercoracoidal facet is drawn
dorsally and markedly raised dorsal to the dorsal surface, higher than
the ventral portion, aiding in orienting and diagnosing the coracoid
when it is disarticulated.

Much of the medial margin is broadened into a large, elliptical facet
that articulates with the contralateral coracoid. The facet faces
slightly dorsally, so that the long axis of the coracoids would be at an
angle of *c.* 125° in articulation [@Kirton1983]. However, the surface
of the facet is strongly rugose and irregularly pitted throughout on
both coracoids indicating that much cartilage was present, intervening
in the articulation. Some coracoids may fit well and closely, however,
in some specimens the intercoracoidal facet is convex, so the two
elements fit less closely (e.g. LEICT 100'1949/21). This makes it hard
to determine the true angle between the coracoids in life. A similar
facet is present on the coracoid laterally, also heavily pitted and
slightly concave posteriorly to receive the proximal humerus
[@Seeley1874]. This is generally not as strongly developed
dorsoventrally as the intercoracoidal facet, and is oriented more
perpendicular to the body of the coracoid. The anterior, triangular
portion of the lateral facet is separated and slightly angled forward
(*c.* 135°; [@Andrews1910]) to articulate with the coracoid facet of
scapula (see
[\[OicenicusScapula\]](#OicenicusScapula){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusScapula"}). The size of the scapular facet is
variable, but is often less than one-third the length of the lateral
articular surface of the coracoid. When articulated, the median portion
of the proximal margin of the scapula would have been placed against the
anterior notch of the coracoid. This forms a fenestra that is also
bordered anteriorly by the clavicles and probably was surrounded
anteriorly by cartilage, although @Andrews1910 did not think that the
scapular and coracoidal cartilages met. Johnson ([-@Johnson1979], [after
@Furbringer1876]) referred to this as the *fenestra coracoscapularis*.
Although this is not likely to be homologous to the coracoscapular
fenestra in extant lizards, it might also be associated with the
*M. scapulohumeralis anterior*, which attaches to the proximal scapula
[@Romer1956; @Kirton1983; @Maxwell2011b]. Posterior to this, the larger
part of the articular surface of the lateral facet on the coracoid forms
the coracoidal portion of the glenoid articulation, opposite the
scapular contribution. @Kirton1983 [p. 90] noted that, in articulation,
the scapula and coracoid do not form a well defined socket for the
humeral insertion, unlike in *Stenopterygius* [@Johnson1979]. A large
amount of cartilage was present between the scapula, coracoid, and
humerus, so the true orientation of the latter cannot be determined. The
posterior margin of the coracoid is variably rounded, connecting the
medial and lateral facets: NHMUK PV R2148 has a straighter margin
laterally, whereas NHMUK PV R2149 is regularly rounded, almost
semicircular. Some coracoids from well-ossified individuals (e.g.  CAMSM
J63920) have a small excavation posterior to the glenoid articulation
that may be surfaced in finished bone. This small excavation forms a
slight concavity in the posterior margin of the coracoid, although not
to the extent of the anterior notch or the posterior notch in the
holotype (NHMUK PV R2133) and LEICT 100'1949/20 (see
[\[OicenicusDiscussion\]](#OicenicusDiscussion){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusDiscussion"}).

[\[OicenicusScapula\]]{#OicenicusScapula label="OicenicusScapula"}

Proximally, the scapula takes part in the glenoid articulation with the
coracoid and is expanded posteriorly for this structure
([\[fig:Oicenicus-pectoral,pl21\]](#fig:Oicenicus-pectoral,pl21){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-pectoral,pl21"}, figs 5--8). The more distal
portion narrows into a strap-like shank that is directed
posterodorsally. The proximal end of the scapula is deeply pitted and
has an elongate and shallow [S]{.sans-serif}-shape, which may be
grooved, in proximal view. This surface is expanded posteriorly into a
teardrop-like area that is straight medially, and convex laterally. This
area articulates with the coracoid (forward portion) to form the glenoid
facet, for which the scapula is greatly widened and heavily rugose: it
is likely that much cartilage would have intervened in the glenoid
articulation between the scapula, coracoid and the proximal humerus.
Anteriorly, the proximal margin is strongly deflected laterally to form
the acromion process, which forms a roughened ridge along the proximal
one-half of the anterior margin of the scapula that may have been
covered by cartilage. The middle section of the proximal margin is the
thinnest part and was positioned opposite the anterior notch of the
coracoid in life. This middle section of the proximal articulation of
the scapula would not have directly articulated with the coracoid, but
rather may have continued the cartilage surrounding the anterior notch
of the coracoid posteriorly (see
[\[OicenicusCoracoid\]](#OicenicusCoracoid){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusCoracoid"}). This portion of the proximal margin is
usually roughened like the rest of the proximal scapular margin.
However, in a few specimens (e.g.  NHMUK PV R2140, R2152 and R2160;
[\[pl21\]](#pl21){reference-type="ref" reference="pl21"}) the bone is
smoothed to a rounded and slightly concave edge. The anterior margin of
the scapula is convex in lateral view and often continuously curved. In
more heavily ossified individuals, this is more strongly angled,
separating the positions of the acromion process, midsection and
coracoid and glenoid facets more clearly.

Posterior to the anterior curve of the [S]{.sans-serif}-shape of the
anterior margin, the scapula is concave laterally, shallowing distally
between the converging arms of the acromion process anteriorly and the
expanded posterior facet. This concavity may have been the location of
muscles connected to the humerus (*M. scapulohumeralis anterior*:
[@Maxwell2011b]), although there is little evidence of discrete
attachment positions. The anterior margin of the scapula was gently
concave and was covered anteriorly by the internal (posterodorsal) face
of the distal clavicle (see
[\[OicenicusClavicle\]](#OicenicusClavicle){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusClavicle"}). Much of its surface is roughened and
slightly flattened (e.g.  PETMG R220) where it would fit into the
posterodorsal channel of the clavicle
[@Seeley1874; @Andrews1910; @Appleby1956]. The sharper posterior margin
of the scapula is strongly concave in lateral view, particularly
proximally, and forms a clear neck in the scapula that separates the
proximal, articular portion and the distal blade. This blade is slightly
curved dorsomedially around the rib cage, becoming slightly thinner
distally, but may largely retain its dorsoventral height throughout
(e.g. the holotype: NHMUK PV R2133), or may significantly broaden (e.g. 
NHMUK PV R2139 and R2140). Distally, the scapula is squared off, but
this margin, and the surrounding bone, is pitted and grooved indicating
that it would be continued by cartilage in life, the extent of which is
uncertain. Laterally, the surface of the scapula is generally roughened,
with rugose areas marking the attachment points of pectoral muscles. It
is difficult to determine the true locations of muscle attachment, as
has been attempted for *Stenopterygius* [@Johnson1979], as the requisite
features are not clear. The medial surface is slightly concave
proximally, and relatively featureless. Between the proximal and distal
portions, there is a small development of shaft-like thickening along
the midline of the scapular blade manifested as a triangular convexity.
The medial surface of the distal blade is smoother and slightly concave
proximodistally.

The scapula in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* shows a great degree of
variation in its morphology, most likely due to its endochondral
development. The middle portion of the proximal margin of the scapula,
which would have been placed opposite the anterior notch of the coracoid
in life, is often roughened, but is rounded and smoothed in NHMUK PV
R2140. The acromion process is clearly offset anteriorly in some
specimens, forming a strong emargination of the dorsal margin (e.g. 
NHMUK PV R1667 and PETMG R222). The dorsal margin is also occasionally
straighter and confluent with the acromion process, which is more square
proximally (e.g.  NHMUK PV R2133). @Maxwell2011b [p. 460] claim that the
"morphological variation exhibited in the scapula of *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* alone approaches the total amount of variation seen in the
element among ophthalmosaurids as a whole". The similarity between the
pectoral girdles of different ophthamosaurids makes it of little use
taxonomically. Whether the extensive variation in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* is peculiar to this species, or a result of the relative glut
of material is unclear. Great variation is also found in the pectoral
girdles and forelimbs of other common ichthyosaurs, especially
*Ichthyosaurus* and *Stenopterygius*
[@McGowan1974a; @McGowan1979; @Johnson1979].

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: left humerus (GLAHM
V1893) in dorsal (**a**), ventral (**b**), proximal (**c**), distal
(**d**), anterior (**e**) and posterior (**f**) views; reconstructed
right forelimb (NHMUK PV R3702) in dorsal view (**g**). Abbreviations:
**af**, anterior accessory element facet of humerus; **dp**, dorsal
process; **h**, humerus; **i**, intermedium; **m**, muscle tubercle;
**p**, pisiform; **pa**, pre-axial accessory element; **r**, radius;
**rd**, radiale; **rf**, radial facet of humerus; **u**, ulna; **ul**;
ulnare; **uf**, ulnar facet of humerus; **vp**, ventral process
(deltopectoral crest); **Arabic numerals**, distal carpals; **roman
numerals**, metacarpals. Scale bars represent 100 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-forelimb\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-forelimb
label="fig:Oicenicus-forelimb"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-forelimb.png "fig:"){#fig:Oicenicus-forelimb
width="\\textwidth"} [\[fig:Oicenicus-humdor\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-humdor
label="fig:Oicenicus-humdor"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-humven\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-humven
label="fig:Oicenicus-humven"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-humprox\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-humprox
label="fig:Oicenicus-humprox"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-humdist\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-humdist
label="fig:Oicenicus-humdist"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-humant\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-humant
label="fig:Oicenicus-humant"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-humpos\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-humpos
label="fig:Oicenicus-humpos"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-flimbdor\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-flimbdor
label="fig:Oicenicus-flimbdor"}

[\[OicenicusForelimb\]]{#OicenicusForelimb label="OicenicusForelimb"}

The forelimb is robust and strongly modified to a hydrodynamical shape
([@McGowan1973a; @McGowan1992b];
[\[fig:Oicenicus-flimbdor,pl22\]](#fig:Oicenicus-flimbdor,pl22){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-flimbdor,pl22"}). Disarticulation of much of
the material from the Oxford Clay Formation has led to differing
interpretations of the orientation and articulation of the forelimb
elements. Efforts to solve this have focussed on the humerus, which has
the most distinct characteristics and asymmetries. The articulations and
orientations of the more distal elements follow from the interpretation
of the humerus. @Seeley1874 [p. 705, pl. 46, fig. 3] originally showed
the humerus and forelimb inverted anteroposteriorly (compared to the
orientation used in the following sections), so that the smallest facet
was located posteriorly, equivalent to the right and left humeri being
switched. @Andrews1910 [pp 51--53, fig. 36], apparently on the advice of
Mr Alfred Leeds, reversed this orientation dorsoventrally, placing the
dorsal process ventrally: the forelimb was placed on the correct side,
but rotated 180° on its long axis. The orientation of the humerus was
corrected by @Kirton1983 [p. 96], following the interpretation of
articulated specimens of *Stenopterygius* by @Johnson1979. Therefore,
both @Seeley1874 [pl. 46, fig. 3] and @Andrews1910 [fig. 36a, b] figured
a left humerus (the paratype: NHMUK PV R2134) in dorsal view. Because of
these re-orientations of the forelimb, the names given to more distal
elements, particularly the epipodials and proximal carpals, have
changed. Also, the configuration and homologies of the ichthyosaur
forelimb have caused problems for several authors, particularly when the
material studied is disarticulated
[@Kiprijanoff1881; @McGowan1972a; @Johnson1979]. Here, we follow the
nomenclature of @Motani1999 [see especially fig. 7 A], which follows
Kirton ([@Kirton1983];
[\[fig:Oicenicus-flimbdor\]](#fig:Oicenicus-flimbdor){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-flimbdor"}). For *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*,
confident reconstruction of the forelimb is largely based on a sketch
made by Mr Alfred Leeds and kept in the NHMUK collections with specimen
NHMUK PV R3702 [@Kirton1983 fig. 29]. His knowledge, as one of the major
collectors of material, generates more certainty in positioning these
forelimb elements. In this interpretation, the forelimb of
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* possesses four primary digits and two
accessory digits (see
[\[OicenicusForelimbAccessory\]](#OicenicusForelimbAccessory){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusForelimbAccessory"}).

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: outlines of
referred humeri in dorsal view: **a**, NHMUK PV R2132, right humerus;
**b**, NHMUK PV R2135, left humerus; **c**, NHMUK PV R2173, right
humerus; **d, e**, NHMUK PV R2138, left and right humeri; **f**, NHMUK
PV R2186, left humerus. **b, d** and **f** have been reflected to appear
as a right humerus in dorsal view for comparison. Humeri have been
aligned to maintain a vertical long axis. Abbreviations: **af**,
anterior distal facet; **rf**, radial facet; **uf**, ulnar facet. Dashed
lines mark complete element outlines. Scale bar represents 100 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-humerusoutlines\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-humerusoutlines
label="fig:Oicenicus-humerusoutlines"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-humerus-outlines.pdf){#fig:Oicenicus-humerusoutlines}

[\[OicenicusHumerus\]]{#OicenicusHumerus label="OicenicusHumerus"}

The short and robust humerus is an important element in the pectoral
region of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and ichthyosaurs generally
([\[fig:Oicenicus-humdor,fig:Oicenicus-humven,fig:Oicenicus-humprox,fig:Oicenicus-humdist,fig:Oicenicus-humant,fig:Oicenicus-humpos,fig:Oicenicus-humerusoutlines,pl22,pl23\]](#fig:Oicenicus-humdor,fig:Oicenicus-humven,fig:Oicenicus-humprox,fig:Oicenicus-humdist,fig:Oicenicus-humant,fig:Oicenicus-humpos,fig:Oicenicus-humerusoutlines,pl22,pl23){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-humdor,fig:Oicenicus-humven,fig:Oicenicus-humprox,fig:Oicenicus-humdist,fig:Oicenicus-humant,fig:Oicenicus-humpos,fig:Oicenicus-humerusoutlines,pl22,pl23"}).
Proximally, the head is expanded to form a large surface for
articulation with the glenoid facets of the coracoid and scapula.
Distally, the humerus is expanded, particularly anteroposteriorly, and
separated into three facets for articulation with the radius, ulna and
an anterior accessory element. Between these extremities, the humerus is
constricted slightly into a short shaft-like diaphysis, marked by
anterior and posterior emarginations. The proximal surface is flattened
but slightly convex and heavily pitted throughout in both small and even
the largest individuals that show strong ossification in other elements,
indicating that the epiphysis was covered by a large amount of cartilage
(see
[\[OicenicusCoracoid,OicenicusScapula\]](#OicenicusCoracoid,OicenicusScapula){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusCoracoid,OicenicusScapula"}). Some humeri referable
to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* have a low marginal ridge around the
proximal surface, creating a small internal channel. This is likely due
to variation in the extent of ossification of the cartilaginous cap. In
proximal view, the long axis of the proximal humerus is angled around
45° anteroventrally relative to the true anteroposterior orientation of
the humerus (as given by the distal facets). Although superficially
there appears to be torsion in the humeral shaft, this relates to the
lateral expansion of the proximal head by the large dorsal and ventral
trochanters [@Kirton1983]. The dorsal process is situated about halfway
along on the anteroposterior length of the humerus, and rises into a
high, plate-like ridge. Proximally, the surface is pitted, a
continuation of the proximal cartilaginous cap, but much of the distal
surface is finished, although roughened for the attachment of the
pectoral muscles. Distally, the dorsal process descends into the humeral
diaphysis, extending slightly anteriorly along its length, for about
half of the proximodistal length of the humerus. The larger ventral
process is not as sharply demarcated from the main body of the humerus,
and is positioned further anteriorly than the dorsal process, towards
the anterior margin. It is analogous to the deltopectoral crest
[@Kirton1983; *contra* @Johnson1979]. The ventral process is a broad,
rounded projection of the anteroventral portion of the humerus,
extending the proximal surface of the humerus, and causing the apparent
torsion described above. Much of the more distal surface is finished,
but roughened for the attachment of muscle slips, however, in the
paratype (NHMUK PV R2134), several unfinished pits descend onto the
ventral surface from the proximal surface. This likely reflects
variation in proximal ossification. The ventral process also extends
over the diaphysis of the humerus for more than half of its length. This
causes a broad proximal anterior surface on the humerus, made slightly
concave due to the strong anterior development of the dorsal process,
which narrows distally. The anterior margin of the humerus is broad and
rounded, compared to the narrower and sharper posterior margin; these
features help in orientating isolated humeri [@Kirton1983]. These two
margins converge distally from the proximal head, forming the diaphysis,
before rapidly diverging to form the long distal articular portion of
the humerus. @Kirton1983 [94] noted that the posterior margin does not
appear as strongly emarginated as the anterior margin. This is due in
part to the greater anterior expansion of the anterior margin distally
to accommodate the anterior distal facet.

llcSSSSS Specimen & & R/L & Proximodistal length & &\
(lr)5-6(lr)7-8 & & & & Proximal & Distal & Proximal & Distal\
CAMSM & J24860 & R & 165 & 120.6 & 123.8 & 88.4 & 67.9\
& J29797 & L & 143 & & 114.7 & & 47.7\
& J29856 & L & 226 & 167 & 205 & 164 & 85.1\
& J65451 & L & 155 & 105 & 137.1 & 105 & 56.6\
& J65452 & L & 165 & 100.3 & 141.3 & 104 & 58\
& J65582 & & 169 & & 143.6 & & 59.8\
& J65585 & & 168 & & 147.8 & & 61.8\
& TN948? & L & 172 & 97.8 & 146.3 & 108.9 & 55.2\
& TN948? & R & 178 & 109.6 & 143 & 120.8 & 59.2\
& TN948? & R & 185 & 119.9 & 157 & & 58.1\
& TN948? & L & 61.3 & & & &\
NHMUK & 41237 & L & 45 & & 38.4 & & 15.3\
& R1668 & L & 153 & 103.5 & 125.4 & &\
& R1712 & R & 135.9 & & 112.2 & & 55.25\
& R2132 & R & 144 & 84.3 & 124 & 84 & 47.5\
& R2134 & L & 170 & 112 & 144.9 & 123 & 54.9\
& R2135 & L & 196 & & 150 & &\
& R2137 & R & 156 & 111.15 & 137.4 & 103 & 54.8\
& R2149 & R & 159 & 103.9 & 135.1 & 125 & 55.6\
& R2173 & R & 176 & 117.7 & 152 & &\
& R2186 & L & 161 & 105 & 132.9 & 99 & 56\
& R4753 & L & 164 & & 132.9 & &\
& R6907 & L & 112.2 & 73.8 & 84.6 & 68.5 & 42.6\
& R8653 & L & 153 & & 120 & & 47.5\
& R8653 & R & 151 & & 121.4 & &\
& R8737 & L & 149 & 92.55 & 126.4 & 94 & 48.9\
& R8737 & R & 153 & & 124.8 & & 47.75\
OUMNH & J1587 & L & 173 & & 149 & 133 & 77.5\
PETMG & R35 & R & 169 & 98.6 & 151.3 & & 54.3\
& R95 & R & 162 & 122.6 & 143.6 & 117.2 & 56.2\
& R186 & L & 171 & 111.3 & & &\
& R220 & L & 146.8 & & 137.6 & 99 & 50.2\
& R220 & R & 142.5 & 108.1 & 135.6 & 99.9 & 51.9\
& R224 & L & 146.5 & 87.6 & 125.4 & 85.3 & 40.8\
& R227 & L & 187 & 113 & & 124.6 &\
& R232 & L & 165 & 103.6 & 152 & & 57.6\
& R335 & R & 145.8 & 93.8 & & 98.3 & 48.7\
& R335 & L & 151 & & & 94.3 & 48.7\

\

Distally, the humerus is anteroposteriorly elongate, and slightly
broadened, for the distal articulations with the three epipodials. The
bone here is smoother than on the more proximal surfaces as there are no
muscle attachment points in this region. In dorsal or ventral view, the
distal margin of the humerus is separated into three parts by large
obtuse angles. These mark the positions of the ridges that separate the
three distal articular facets on the distal face of the humerus. The
facets are broad, concave and heavily pitted for the application of
cartilage that intervened between the articulations. The anterior facet
is the smallest; it is angled slightly anteriorly and articulates with
the anterior accessory element. This facet narrows anteriorly towards
the anterior margin of the humerus creating a triangular facet. The
middle facet faces distally, is the largest facet and is a rectangular
articulation for the radius. Towards the anteroposterior midline of this
facet, the distal face of the humerus broadens dorsoventrally. Posterior
to the radial facet, the posterior facet articulates with the ulna and
is deflected slightly posteriorly. This facet has a broad pentagonal
shape: the anterior portion is rectangular, but posterior to this,
tapers with the posterior margin of the humerus, becoming rounded
posteriorly. The irregular form of the ulnar facet is extended by the
development of two tubera on the distal margin of the humerus dorsally
and ventrally, at about the anteroposterior midline of that facet. These
tubera are variably developed (compare NHMUK PV R2134 and R2173) and, in
some cases, extend distally onto the ulna, but usually the ventral tuber
is the largest (see
[\[OicenicusForelimbEpipodials\]](#OicenicusForelimbEpipodials){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusForelimbEpipodials"}; [@Kirton1983]). @Andrews1910
[53] suggested that this variability might be sexually dimorphic, citing
the approximately equal proportions of those specimens with and without
these tubera. However, the humerus is invariably broadened here, whether
the tubera are well developed or not. These prominences can also be
variably developed between both humeri of a single individual (e.g. 
NHMUK PV R2138); it is more likely that their relative development is a
result of individual variation rather than sexual dimorphism.

The humerus in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* shows a certain amount of
variation, largely related to the extent of cartilage proximally and
distally, and to its position as the largest part of the forelimb
([\[fig:Oicenicus-humerusoutlines,tbl:Oicenicus-humeral-measurements\]](#fig:Oicenicus-humerusoutlines,tbl:Oicenicus-humeral-measurements){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-humerusoutlines,tbl:Oicenicus-humeral-measurements"}).
The dorsal and ventral processes vary in size, although the latter is
always larger, and thus the proximal dorsoventral expansion of the
humerus corresponds to the development of these processes. Perhaps the
most obvious instance of variation is found in the distal articular
facets, which vary greatly in relative size (particularly the anterior
accessory element facet) and orientation
([\[tbl:Oicenicus-humfacet-measurements\]](#tbl:Oicenicus-humfacet-measurements){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:Oicenicus-humfacet-measurements"}). @Fischer2012 [table
2] considered the ratio anterior facet length/radial facet length to be
of taxonomic importance in ophthalmosaurine ichthyosaurs. However, the
values obtained for *Acamptonectes densus* fall into the range of
variation exhibited by specimens referred to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
(0.173--0.778;
[\[tbl:Oicenicus-humfacet-measurements\]](#tbl:Oicenicus-humfacet-measurements){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:Oicenicus-humfacet-measurements"}), although the median
value is slightly higher (0.414) in *Ophthalmosaurus*. Alongside
variation in the distal facets, the constriction of the humeral
diaphysis, which is generally strong in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*,
varies in breadth. This creates a stronger separation of the proximal
and distal heads in NHMUK PV R1668 than in R2853, for instance.

llcSSSS Specimen & & L/R & & ARF (%)\
(lr)4-6 & & & Anterior & Radial & Ulnar &\
CAMSM & J29797 & L & 11.8 & 54 & 48.3 & 21.9\
NHMUK & 41237 & L & 4.3 & 13.7 & 21.5 & 31.4\
& R1668 & L & 25.4 & 57 & 48.9 & 44.6\
& R1712 & R & 27.7 & 51.6 & 45.2 & 53.7\
& R2132 & R & 23.1 & 57.2 & 46 & 40.4\
& R2134 & L & 34.2 & 62.7 & 48.5 & 54.5\
& R2135 & L & 38 & 57 & 54 & 66.7\
& R2137 & R & 22 & 54.7 & 51.75 & 40.2\
& R2149 & R & 19.4 & 65 & 55.8 & 29.8\
& R2173 & R & 14.2 & 82 & 61.6 & 17.3\
& R2186 & L & 22.5 & 58 & 51 & 38.8\
& R4753 & L & 20 & 55.65 & 45.6 & 35.9\
& R6907 & L & 8 & 34.35 & 32.05 & 23.3\
& R8653 & L & 13.7 & 57.8 & 41.3 & 23.7\
& R8653 & R & 23.9 & 56.4 & 46 & 42.4\
& R8737 & L & 21 & 55.5 & 48 & 37.8\
& R8737 & R & 22.1 & 56.1 & 47.8 & 39.4\
PETMG & R35 & R & 33.1 & 59.3 & 49.2 & 55.8\
& R95 & R & 43.2 & 55.5 & 45.1 & 77.8\
& R186 & L & 20.5 & 68.8 & 60.6 & 29.8\
& R220 & L & 25.7 & 58.4 & 47.7 & 44\
& R220 & R & 28.3 & 49.6 & 40.2 & 57.1\
& R224 & L & 25 & 49.8 & 40.8 & 50.2\
& R227 & L & & 64.9 & &\
& R232 & L & 35.9 & 66.4 & 44.9 & 54.1\
& R335 & R & & 52.8 & 41.2 & 0\
& R335 & L & & 49.4 & 44.5 & 0\

\

The humerus of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* was originally considered to
be diagnostic of the genus [@Seeley1874]. Later discoveries of Middle
and Late Jurassic ophthalmosaurid ichthyosaurs, such as *Arthropterygius
chrisorum, Caypullisaurus bonapartei,* and *Undorosaurus gorodischensis*
have reduced its taxonomic utility somewhat. In all ichthyosaurs, the
humerus is one of the most useful aids in taxonomic identification,
along with the configuration of the rest of the forelimb [@Motani1999].
Within Ophthalmosauridae, the distal articulations of the humerus become
more variable also: the relative positions of the distal elements
ostensibly become more plastic between taxa. The orientation of the
facets, particularly the ulnar facet, which may face distally or
slightly posteriorly, has also been used in systematic studies
[@Fischer2013a character 34]. Some phylogenetic analyses have identified
the development of the dorsal and ventral processes as important in the
systematics of Parvipelvia [@Fischer2012; @Fischer2013a]. The dorsal
process becomes notably well developed and plate-like [@Motani1999c
character 56] in the more derived parvipelvians. Similarly, the ventral
process is very poorly developed [@Fischer2013a character 39] in
*Leptonectes* and *Temnodontosaurus* [@McGowan1974; @McGowan1974a], but
larger in more derived taxa, such as *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,
Brachypterygius extremus,* and other ophthalmosaurids (see above &
[\[BextremusHumerus,NenthekiodonHumerus,MacropterygiusHumerus\]](#BextremusHumerus,NenthekiodonHumerus,MacropterygiusHumerus){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusHumerus,NenthekiodonHumerus,MacropterygiusHumerus"}).

[\[OicenicusForelimbEpipodials\]]{#OicenicusForelimbEpipodials
label="OicenicusForelimbEpipodials"}

The radius and ulna articulate with the middle and posterior distal
facets of the humerus respectively
([\[fig:Oicenicus-forelimb,pl22\]](#fig:Oicenicus-forelimb,pl22){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-forelimb,pl22"}). The humerus also articulates
with a pre-axial accessory element; this will be considered in
[\[OicenicusForelimbAccessory\]](#OicenicusForelimbAccessory){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusForelimbAccessory"}. Following the re-orientation of
the forelimb by Kirton ([-@Kirton1983]; see
[\[OicenicusHumerus\]](#OicenicusHumerus){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusHumerus"}), note that the names of these elements
are reversed from those published prior to this (as in
[@Seeley1874; @Andrews1910]).

Both the radius and ulna are short, strongly thickened, polygonal
elements. The radius is smaller than the ulna and subpentagonal. It
articulates with (right forelimb, clockwise from proximal in dorsal
view) the humerus, pre-axial accessory element, radiale, intermedium,
and ulna. For these articulations, the radius has a flattened proximal
face and is pointed distally, taking the space between the proximal
margins of the radiale and intermedium. The dorsal and ventral surfaces
are finished, but slightly roughened, whereas the edges and the vertical
faces, which articulate with the surrounding elements, are heavily
pitted where thick cartilage would have intervened. Proximally, the
radius follows the contours of its humeral articulation, and so becomes
slightly thicker towards the centre of this surface. Andrews'
[-@Andrews1910 p. 54, fig. 37] description shows the radius and ulna
separated by an interosseous space. The size of the contacts between the
radius, ulna and other elements are variable. In some specimens, the
radius can be square from a lack of close contact, as in NHMUK PV R2853
and GLAHM V1893.

The anterior portion of the ulna is thickened, like the radius, but
posteriorly it becomes narrower, along with the posterodistal humerus,
tapering towards the posterior margin of the forelimb. This element is
more square than the radius, articulating with (right forelimb,
clockwise from proximal in dorsal view) the humerus, radius,
intermedium, ulnare, and sometimes the proximalmost post-axial accessory
element [= pisiform of @Johnson1979]. The medial, proximal, and distal
articular faces are large, and heavily pitted for the application of
cartilage, as is the case with the radius. However, the facet for the
post-axial accessory element is small and poorly developed, and, when in
articulation, these two elements are not positioned as close together as
the other surrounding bones. On the proximal, dorsal, and ventral
margins, there may be a large tubercle, placed close to the
corresponding tubercle on the humerus (see
[\[OicenicusHumerus\]](#OicenicusHumerus){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusHumerus"}; [@Kirton1983]). Posteriorly, the ulna
becomes thinner, and the dorsal and ventral surfaces are slightly
concave, reflecting this. The posterior margin, unlike all others on the
ulna, is not pitted, but is comparatively smooth, although still
roughened. This narrowing is only found in *Ophthalmosaurus*
[@Andrews1910; @Fischer2013a]. @Seeley1874 [p. 705] noted the nutritive
foramina close to the articular margins on all bones of the forelimb.

[\[OicenicusCarpals\]]{#OicenicusCarpals label="OicenicusCarpals"}

In *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, there are three proximal carpals:
radiale, intermedium, and ulnare, and three distal carpals, supporting
digits two, three, and four of the pentadactyl manus
([\[fig:Oicenicus-forelimb,pl22\]](#fig:Oicenicus-forelimb,pl22){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-forelimb,pl22"}). Proximal carpal five and the
entire first digit have been lost [@Motani1999]. The proximal carpals
are of similar size and shape: the radiale and intermedium are clearly
polygonal, with several facets for articulation with the surrounding
elements. The radiale articulates with (right forelimb, clockwise from
proximal in dorsal view) the proximal pre-axial accessory element,
second pre-axial accessory element, distal carpals two and three,
intermedium, and radius, while the intermedium articulates with the
radius, radiale, distal carpals three and four, ulnare, and ulna. Like
the radius proximally, these are strongly thickened elements, with
roughened dorsal and ventral surfaces and heavily pitted vertical
articular faces where cartilage was present. The intermedium is wedged
between the radius and ulna proximally, and distal carpals three and
four distally, so that both its proximal and distal margins are pointed.
The ulnare has more rounded margins than the two more anterior proximal
carpals and, like the ulna, narrows towards the posterior margin of the
forelimb. This bone articulates with the ulna, intermedium, distal
carpal four, metacarpal five, and the proximal post-axial accessory
element [= pisiform of @Johnson1979]. @Kirton1983 [p. 101] noted that,
when articulated, the proximal and distal borders of the radiale,
intermedium and ulnare align obliquely to the long axis of the forelimb.
This is continued by more distal elements, but is less clear as these
are rounded. @Johnson1979 [pp 75--76] suggested that this allowed
flexibility without creating lines of weakness in the forelimb.

The three distal carpals (two, three, and four) represent smaller forms
of the proximal carpals and are very similar in shape. Distal carpals
three and four particularly are placed closely between the proximal
carpals (radiale and intermedium, and intermedium and ulnare
respectively) and so have pointed proximal margins. In all three
elements, the distal margins are more rounded than in the more proximal
limb elements. This reflects the transition to the more distal
metacarpals and phalanges, which are all rounded, and were individually
surrounded by thick cartilage [@Kirton1983]. Both the proximal and
distal carpals are thinner than the epipodials, but still have broad
vertical faces for articulation with surrounding elements, particularly
on the closely applied proximal margins.

[\[OicenicusMetacarpals\]]{#OicenicusMetacarpals
label="OicenicusMetacarpals"}

Following @Motani1999, the four metacarpals present in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* represent the homologues of metacarpals two to five in the
pentadactyl manus
([\[fig:Oicenicus-forelimb,pl22\]](#fig:Oicenicus-forelimb,pl22){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-forelimb,pl22"}). This differs from Kirton's
[-@Kirton1983] interpretation, in which metacarpals one to four are
present, and also in their position, due to the lack of a fourth distal
carpal (see
[\[OicenicusCarpals\]](#OicenicusCarpals){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusCarpals"}). The metacarpals are more rounded and
irregularly shaped than the more proximal elements in dorsoventral view,
approaching the form of the phalanges. However, they retain obliquely
angled margins, particularly proximally, for articulation with the
distal carpals. Their shape and position suggest that they have lost
close contact with adjacent elements. Many of the more distal limb
elements would have been surrounded by cartilage, and the variable
ossification of this creates heterogeneity in the forms of these
elements. Each metacarpal supports a single digit distally (see
[\[OicenicusForelimbDigits\]](#OicenicusForelimbDigits){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusForelimbDigits"}). From the metacarpals, the digits
are directed slightly anteriorly due to the zigzag orientation of the
distal faces of the distal carpals and metacarpals. As stated above,
this may aid in reducing lines of weakness in the forelimb. Metacarpals
two to four are more discoidal than the proximal elements. Their
vertical faces retain the roughness and pitting associated with the
cartilage surrounding each element.

The loss of the fifth distal carpal and reduction of distal carpals two,
three, and four (see
[\[OicenicusCarpals\]](#OicenicusCarpals){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusCarpals"}) means that the fifth metacarpal is
positioned more proximally than the line of the other three metacarpals,
articulating proximally with the ulnare. In this position, it aligns
with the distal carpal row, effectively replacing distal carpal five,
and has taken on a sub-quadrate form, similar to the other distal
carpals. Metacarpal five is noticeably larger and more equidimensional
in dorsal and ventral view than the other three metacarpals and has a
closer contact with the ulnare and distal carpal four proximally and
anteroproximally respectively. It is also slightly thicker than the
other metacarpals, due to its more proximal position. The posterior
margin is notably convex, and would articulate with the post-axial
accessory digit, although this contact would probably not have been
close.

[\[OicenicusForelimbDigits\]]{#OicenicusForelimbDigits
label="OicenicusForelimbDigits"}

The forelimb in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* possesses four primary
digits, homologues of digits two to five of the pentadactyl manus,
supported proximally by metacarpals two to five ([@McGowan1972b];
[\[fig:Oicenicus-forelimb,pl22\]](#fig:Oicenicus-forelimb,pl22){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-forelimb,pl22"}). From Leeds' diagram (see
[\[OicenicusForelimb\]](#OicenicusForelimb){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusForelimb"}), the proximal digital elements appear to
be angled slightly anteriorly, curving distally to line up approximately
with the long axis of the forelimb. At least seven phalanges were
present in each digit, and eight in digit 4, but @Kirton1983 suggested
that this is unlikely to be the full complement. The phalanges are
rounded in dorsal and ventral view and decrease in size and thickness
distally; the proximal phalanges are more elliptical and elongate
anteroposteriorly than the distal elements. Like in more proximal
elements, the margins of the primary digits are roughened and pitted and
have a central groove along this face, creating a slight hourglass shape
in anterior or posterior view. The phalanges remain rather
dorsoventrally thick proximally, but narrow greatly in the distal
forelimb, becoming more discoidal. This, and their relative spacing,
indicates that a significant amount of cartilage was present between the
individually ossified elements, particularly distally. As forelimb
material is often disarticulated, variation in its configuration, common
in Lower Jurassic taxa, is difficult to determine. Some reconstructions
have been attempted, which show the possibility of digital bifurcation
(e.g.  NHMUK PV R2853, right forelimb; [@Andrews1910; @Kirton1983]), but
this is circumstantial.

[\[OicenicusForelimbAccessory\]]{#OicenicusForelimbAccessory
label="OicenicusForelimbAccessory"}

Two complete (extending a similar length to the primary digits)
accessory digits are present in the forelimb of *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*: an anterior accessory digit, of which the proximal element
articulates with the anterior distal facet of the humerus, and a
posterior accessory digit, of which the proximal element articulates
proximally with a proximodistal facet on the ulna
([\[fig:Oicenicus-forelimb,pl22\]](#fig:Oicenicus-forelimb,pl22){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-forelimb,pl22"}). @Kirton1983 [fig. 30] further
identified an isolated element in NHMUK PV R3702 that may be part of an
incomplete second post-axial accessory digit. The proximal pre-axial
accessory element -- "olecranon" of @Seeley1874 [p. 703, pl. 46,
fig. 3], "pisiform" of @Andrews1910 [pp 53, 54, fig. 37, pl. 2, fig. 4],
and "extra zeugopodial element" of @Motani1999 [p. 39, fig. 7] --
articulates proximally with the anterior distal facet of the humerus and
with the radius, radiale and distal pre-axial accessory digit
(anticlockwise from proximal in dorsal view). This element is triangular
in dorsoventral cross section along the anteroposterior axis,
corresponding to the shape of the distal humeral facet, and slightly
rounded in dorsal and ventral views, becoming a little wider distally.
The anterior narrowing of this element helps form a streamlined
forelimb, as seen in many ichthyosaurs [@McGowan1992b]. Its other
articular faces are thickened greatly, the posterior facet almost
matching the thickness of the radius, and are heavily pitted for the
application of cartilage between these articulations. The more distal
elements of the pre-axial accessory digit match the corresponding rows
along which they align, becoming thinner and more rounded distally. The
decrease in size of the pre-axial accessory digit elements occurs more
rapidly distally and there is often no more than six elements distal to
the humerus. These narrow to form a streamlined anterior margin to the
forelimb. Like more posterior elements, the contacts are not necessarily
close, particularly distally, so that only the proximal two elements
have an angled posterior margin.

The proximalmost element of the post-axial accessory digit is usually
homologised with the pisiform. This element articulates proximally with
a small facet on the posterodistal ulna and with the posterior ulna. In
dorsoventral view, the pisiform is teardrop-shaped, tapering proximally,
and also narrows towards the posterior margin of the forelimb, as with
the corresponding pre-axial element. The post-axial element immediately
distal to the pisiform is also proximodistally elongate, but the
elements distal to this are more rounded. As with the pre-axial digit,
these elements are smaller than those in the rows they align with,
although this digit may have eight elements.

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: pelvic girdle
(GLAHM V1916) in lateral (**a**) and medial (**b**) views and
reconstructed left hindlimb (NHMUK PV R4693--5) in ventral view (**c**).
Abbreviations: **as**, astragalus; **cal**, calcaneum; **dc**, distal
carpal 2; **f**, femur; **fac**, acetabular (femoral) facet on the
ischiopubis; **fai**, acetabular (femoral) facet on the ilium; **fi**,
fibula; **fis**, ilial facet on the ischiopubis; **fsi**, ischiopubic
facet on the ilium; **il**, ilium; **is**, ischiopubis; **lig**, area of
ligamentous attachment to the vertebral column; **n**, notch; **obf**,
obturator foramen; **t**, tibia; **vp**, ventral process. **Dashed
lines** mark complete element outlines. Scale bars represent 100 mm
(**a, b**) and 50 mm (**c**).
[\[fig:Oicenicus-pelvis-hlimb\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-pelvis-hlimb
label="fig:Oicenicus-pelvis-hlimb"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-pelvis.png "fig:"){#fig:Oicenicus-pelvis-hlimb}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-pelvislat\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-pelvislat
label="fig:Oicenicus-pelvislat"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-pelvismed\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-pelvismed
label="fig:Oicenicus-pelvismed"}
[\[fig:Oicenicus-hindlimbven\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-hindlimbven
label="fig:Oicenicus-hindlimbven"}

[\[OicenicusPelvis\]]{#OicenicusPelvis label="OicenicusPelvis"}

The pelvic girdle is very much reduced in comparison with the pectoral
girdle, and has lost all bony contact with the vertebral column
([1.27](#fig:Oicenicus-pelvis-hlimb){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-pelvis-hlimb"}). It comprises only two
elements, a slender ilium and a fused, plate-like ischiopubis.
Reconstructions of the position and articulations of the pelvic girdle
are based upon mostly complete and articulated specimens of
*Stenopterygius* from the Toarcian of south-western Germany (compare the
reconstructions of [@Wiman1921 figs 5 & 6,] with [@Huene1922]). As
mentioned above (see
[\[OicenicusVertebralcolumn\]](#OicenicusVertebralcolumn){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusVertebralcolumn"}), the lack of contact with the
axial skeleton means that the position of the pelvic girdle, and
associated sacral region, is uncertain. @Buchholtz2001 and @Kirton1983
placed this contact around vertebrae 39 and 42 respectively.

[\[OicenicusIlium\]]{#OicenicusIlium label="OicenicusIlium"}

The ilium is a short, curved and twisted rod of bone forming the dorsal
portion of the pelvic girdle
([\[fig:Oicenicus-pelvislat,fig:Oicenicus-pelvismed,pl24\]](#fig:Oicenicus-pelvislat,fig:Oicenicus-pelvismed,pl24){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-pelvislat,fig:Oicenicus-pelvismed,pl24"}, figs
1, 2). There is no direct connection to the vertebral column, but the
pelves were likely attached by ligaments that connected dorsally.
@Kirton1983 used this twisting to determine that the distal ilium is
deflected medially to lie alongside the vertebral column. This allows
the position of the pelvic girdle to be determined with reasonable
certainty (see also
[\[OicenicusVertebralcolumn\]](#OicenicusVertebralcolumn){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusVertebralcolumn"}). The proximal end is a broad
elliptical, pitted facet, capped by cartilage in life, that articulates
with the anteroproximal portion of the ischiopubis (see
[\[OicenicusIschiopubis\]](#OicenicusIschiopubis){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusIschiopubis"}). This facet is larger than the
corresponding facet on the ischiopubis, so that the posterior portion of
the ilium forms part of the acetabulum. @Andrews1910 and @Kirton1983
disagreed on the relative size of the acetabular contribution, the
former describing a larger face than the latter. This feature appears to
be variable between specimens (compare GLAHM V1070, V1916 and NHMUK PV
R2853), although the contribution of the ilium is always smaller than
that of the ischiopubis (see
[\[OicenicusIschiopubis\]](#OicenicusIschiopubis){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusIschiopubis"}). The lateral surface of the ilium in
some specimens (e.g.  GLAHM V1899) is striated and may mark the origin
of muscles that powered the hindlimb [@Kirton1983]. Distal to this, the
shaft of the ilium narrows along its length, flattening distally, and
curves medially, so that the distal end is angled at about 30° to the
vertical. The surface of this portion is smooth. Distally, the tip of
the ilium is angled further medially than the curve of the bone more
proximally. The medial surface is strongly rugose for the ligamentous
and cartilaginous attachment to the vertebral column.

[\[OicenicusIschiopubis\]]{#OicenicusIschiopubis
label="OicenicusIschiopubis"}

The ischium and pubis are fused along most of their proximodistal
length, together forming an elongate plate
([\[fig:Oicenicus-pelvislat,fig:Oicenicus-pelvismed,pl24\]](#fig:Oicenicus-pelvislat,fig:Oicenicus-pelvismed,pl24){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-pelvislat,fig:Oicenicus-pelvismed,pl24"}, figs
3--8). Their close association makes it reasonable to consider them
together: no clear suture line is visible along their contact. The pubis
is reduced to an anterior bar at the anterior of the ischiopubis, with
the ischium forming much of the posterior, plate-like portion. This is
shown by the retention of a narrow, proximodistally elongate obturator
foramen close to the anterior edge of the ischiopubis ([@McGowan2003],
[after @Romer1956]). @Kirton1983 [104] did not consider this opening to
be homologous with the obturator foramen, but the evolutionary sequence
expounded by McGowan & Motani [-@McGowan2003 56] suggests that this may
be the case (see below). Proximally, the ischiopubis forms a broad,
triangular articular surface that narrows posteriorly, for the ilium
anteromedially and the acetabulum, which occupies most of this surface
laterally and posteriorly. The surface is heavily pitted for the
application of cartilage, and is convex; the acetabular portion faces
slightly posteriorly and laterally, and the ilial facet is angled
slightly ventrally. From this, the anterolateral face of the ischiopubis
(formed by the pubis) is broadened where it meets the proximal articular
surface, and slightly concave, becoming narrower and flatter distally.
Laterally, the pubis is raised dorsal to the posterolateral face of the
ischium, allowing identification of right and left contralateral
elements; the surface is even medially. Distal to the proximal
articulations, the ischiopubis narrows slightly, separating these facets
from the distal plate-like portion, largely formed by the ischium. The
ischium widens towards the distal margin, particularly as the thinner
posterior margin is directed posterodistally. Posterior to the pubic
portion of the ischiopubis, the obturator foramen forms the proximal
portion of a proximodistally elongate channel that extends distally to
the distal margin of the ischiopubis, marking the approximate line of
fusion between the pubis and ischium. Close to the distal margin, along
this line, one or two foramina are present in some specimens. These can
be entirely enclosed in the ischiopubis or open distally forming a small
notch in the distal margin of the ischiopubis. The occurrence, size, and
position of these are variable between and within specimens (compare
GLAHM V1070, V1916, and V1912). For instance, there are two foramina
distally in GLAHM V1912, positioned posterior to the anterior margin.
The distal margin of the ischiopubis is convex in lateral view,
particularly anteriorly, pitted, and has a groove along its length
indicating that it was extended by cartilage, with no direct contact
between the two ischiopubes [@Andrews1910].

![*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874]: right femur (GLAHM
V1916) in dorsal (**a**), ventral (**b**), proximal (**c**), anterior
(**d**), posterior (**e**) and distal (**f**) views. Abbreviations:
**ap**, anterior blunt projection; **dp**, dorsal process; **ff**,
fibular facet of the femur; **m**, muscle scar; **tf**, tibial facet of
the femur; **vp**, ventral process. Scale bars represent 50 mm.
[\[fig:Oicenicus-hlimb\]]{#fig:Oicenicus-hlimb
label="fig:Oicenicus-hlimb"}](./img/fig-Oicenicus-hindpaddle.png){#fig:Oicenicus-hlimb}

[\[OicenicusHindpaddle\]]{#OicenicusHindpaddle
label="OicenicusHindpaddle"}

The hindlimb is strongly reduced relative to the forelimb -- the femur
is about 0.6 times the length of the humerus -- and there are far fewer
elements in the hindlimb than in the forelimb
([\[fig:Oicenicus-hlimb,pl25\]](#fig:Oicenicus-hlimb,pl25){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-hlimb,pl25"}, fig. 6). Unlike the forelimb,
there are fewer specimens that have been recorded as articulated,
although several specimens are mounted as such. Neither did Mr Alfred
Leeds produce a sketch diagram as he did for the forelimb (see
[\[OicenicusForelimb\]](#OicenicusForelimb){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusForelimb"}). Because of this, the configuration of
the hindlimb as a whole has been uncertain. @Kirton1983 accepted the
reconstruction of @Andrews1907 [@Andrews1910], who had discussions with
Mr Alfred Leeds, although Kirton re-oriented the hindlimb. @Andrews1907
[p. 208, fig. 5] originally oriented the femur with the smaller facet
positioned anteriorly, and the smaller proximal process dorsally, later
reversing this anteroposteriorly [@Andrews1910 p. 58, fig. 41].
@Kirton1983 [p. 105], following a similar pattern to her re-orientation
of the humerus, reversed this dorsoventrally, so that the larger, more
anterior proximal process is the ventral. In their interpretation,
@McGowan2003 [p. 42, fig. 65] invoked further characters and
comparisons, such as the extent of the processes distally along the
femur, orienting the femur so that the anterior margin is narrow and the
ventral process is crest-like, thus accepting Andrews' [-@Andrews1910]
interpretation. @Maxwell2012c [p. 1209, fig. 1 P--T], used comparisons
with articulated *Mixosaurus, Ichthyosaurus,* and the then undescribed
*Cryopterygius kristiansenae*, to infer the orientation of the femur.
Their interpretation reversed those of @Andrews1910 and @McGowan2003
anteroposteriorly, and reversed that of Kirton's [-@Kirton1983]
dorsoventrally. Maxwell *et al.*'s [-@Maxwell2012c] orientation is
followed here: the femur is oriented with the broader, more
anteriorly-positioned process dorsally; the narrower process, adjacent
to the anterior concavity, is considered the ventral process; the tibial
facet is typically larger than the fibular facet. The anterior face of
the femur is broad, while the posterior margin is narrow and sharp,
similar to the humerus (see
[\[OicenicusHumerus\]](#OicenicusHumerus){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusHumerus"}).

[\[OicenicusFemur\]]{#OicenicusFemur label="OicenicusFemur"}

The femora take a similar form to the humeri, but differ in their
dimensions
([\[fig:Oicenicus-hlimb,pl25\]](#fig:Oicenicus-hlimb,pl25){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-hlimb,pl25"}, figs 1--5). Proximally, the
articular surface is broad and more strongly convex and rounded than the
proximal surface of the humerus. The surface is unfinished and heavily
pitted for application of the acetabular cartilage. In proximal view,
the extensive dorsal and ventral processes give this surface a
triangular form: the anterior edge aligns dorsoventrally and is
sinusoidal, convex dorsally and concave ventrally, following the
contours of the anterior face. Posterior to this, the proximal surface
narrows towards the posterior margin. The anterior face of the femur is
wide dorsoventrally, due to the great extent of the dorsal and ventral
processes, and is slightly concave. This makes the femur appear
relatively more massive than the humerus proximally. The dorsal and
ventral processes are angled slightly anteriorly at their greatest
height, making the anterior face slightly concave, particularly
proximally. Distally, the anterior face narrows as these processes
descend onto the diaphysis of the femur, giving it a spatulate
appearance. Further distally, the anterior face of the femur becomes
convex, reflecting the dorsal or ventral elongation of the distal femur.
The dorsal process of the femur is the larger of the two and positioned
anterodorsally, slightly anterior to the ventral process when viewed in
dorsoventral view. This process is large and triangular, creating a
slight convexity to the dorsal portion of the anterior margin.
Proximally, the surface is heavily pitted for application of the
articular cartilage. Distal to this, the dorsal process forms a
prominent ridge just behind the anterior margin of the femur that
descends distally onto the diaphysis for about half of the femoral
length. The surface of this ridge is usually roughened for the
attachment of muscles, but in some specimens (e.g.  NHMUK PV R10031),
the unfinished proximal surface extends distally. The ventral process of
the proximal femur is slightly smaller and shorter proximodistally than
the dorsal process. This process is narrower and more crest-like, being
offset from the proximal surface by broad concavities in the ventral
portion of the anterior face and the posteroventral face. The proximal
surface continues the pitting for the articular cartilage, but the
anterior and lateral faces are finished with cortical bone, although
roughened for muscle attachment. The ventral process descends rapidly
onto the femoral diaphysis for slightly less than half the length of the
femur. Behind these two processes, two broad faces are oriented
posterodorsally and posteroventrally respectively. These are slightly
concave, particularly in their proximal portions, and meet at the
narrow, sharp posterior margin of the femur, similar to the form in the
humerus. In dorsal and ventral view, the femur is constricted slightly
distally to one-half of its proximodistal length. This is caused by the
concave anterior and posterior margins. Distally, the margins diverge to
accommodate the distal portion and facets of the femur, with the
anterior margin angled further anteriorly than the posterior margin is
angled posteriorly.

Distally, the femur becomes elongate anteroposteriorly; the anterior
margin is well rounded and convex, while the posterior margin becomes
less sharply defined. @Kirton1983 [106--107] noted that the anterodistal
point of the femur is blunt and the surface unfinished, suggesting that
it may have been continued in cartilage. The distal surface has two
large facets that articulate with the epipodials. As with the humerus
(see [\[OicenicusHumerus\]](#OicenicusHumerus){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusHumerus"}), the two facets are oriented differently:
the posterior facet faces slightly posteriorly relative to the anterior,
forming a large obtuse angle between the two in dorsal and ventral view.
This point marks where a dorsoventral ridge separates the two facets on
the distal face. The two facets are sub-rectangular and concave,
narrowing slightly toward the anterior and posterior ends of the femur,
and are heavily pitted for the application of the intervening cartilage.
The anterior facet is slightly longer and larger than the posterior
facet, and articulates distally with the tibia (see
[\[OicenicusHindlimbEpipodials\]](#OicenicusHindlimbEpipodials){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusHindlimbEpipodials"}); the posterior facet is for
articulation with the fibula. There are slight protuberances on the
dorsal and ventral surfaces of the femur, just proximal to the fibular
facet, and confluent with a slight bulge on the fibula, similar to those
associated with the ulna on the humerus (see
[\[OicenicusHumerus\]](#OicenicusHumerus){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusHumerus"}). These are not developed to anywhere near
the same extent, and may be a result of the rapid narrowing of the
posterodistal femur.

[\[OicenicusHindlimbEpipodials\]]{#OicenicusHindlimbEpipodials
label="OicenicusHindlimbEpipodials"}

The hindlimb epipodials are similar in form to the forelimb epipodials,
articulating proximally with the femur, and forming thickened discs that
taper slightly towards the hindlimb margins, creating a hydrodynamical
shape
([\[fig:Oicenicus-hlimb,pl25\]](#fig:Oicenicus-hlimb,pl25){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-hlimb,pl25"}, fig. 6). The anterior element,
the tibia, is the largest and it articulates with (right hindlimb,
clockwise from proximal in dorsal view) the femur, distal carpal two,
astragalus, and fibula respectively. This element is angled and
polygonal for these articulations. The articular faces are pitted for
the application of cartilage that, as with the forelimb, would intervene
between each element. While the anterior face of the tibia is rather
large, there is no certain evidence for an anterior accessory element;
the extent to which the tibia may have been extended by cartilage is
uncertain. The fibula is smaller and has a more rounded, ovoid shape.
This element articulates with (right hindlimb, clockwise from proximal
in dorsal view) the femur, tibia, astragalus, and calcaneum. The
anterior margin is straight for articulation with the tibia. However,
posteriorly, the fibula becomes narrower and the posterior margin may be
rather sharp, like the ulna (see
[\[OicenicusForelimbEpipodials\]](#OicenicusForelimbEpipodials){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusForelimbEpipodials"}), and is not pitted. Unlike the
ulna, the posterior margin of the fibula is convex and curved in dorsal
and ventral views. Towards its anteroposterior midpoint, the proximal
border of the fibula becomes slightly broader, matching the location of
low protuberances on the femur; these may be points of muscle or
ligamentous attachment as between the humerus and ulna (see ). The
articular faces of the fibula are, like the tibia, pitted for cartilage
or connective tissue.

[\[OicenicusHindlimbMetapodials\]]{#OicenicusHindlimbMetapodials
label="OicenicusHindlimbMetapodials"}

In the reduced hindlimb of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, there are only
about 10 elements certainly present distal to the epipodials; both
@Andrews1910 [fig. 41] and @Kirton1983 [fig. 33] reconstructed the
hindlimb with this many metapodial elements (based on NHMUK PV
R4693--R4695;
[\[fig:Oicenicus-hlimb,pl25\]](#fig:Oicenicus-hlimb,pl25){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-hlimb,pl25"}, fig. 6). Apparently no example of
the hindlimb of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* is more complete than NHMUK
PV R4693--R4695, nor shows the configuration of these more distal
elements. @Kirton1983 [107--108] refrained from homologising these
elements; @Caldwell1997 homologised the proximal tarsal elements in
*Stenopterygius* with (anterior to posterior) the centrale, astragalus,
and calcaneum. The most basal ichthyosaurs, however, have lost or do not
ossify the anterior proximal tarsal (centrale), and through their
evolution, the second distal tarsal moves proximally to take its place
[@McGowan2003]. Here we treat the proximal metapodial row as containing
(anterior to posterior) the second distal tarsal, astragalus, and
calcaneum; these correspond to the tibiale, intermedium, and fibulare of
@Andrews1910. These three elements are irregularly rounded and slightly
thickened, with pitted articular faces, but the contact between them and
other elements would not have been close. The second distal tarsal and
astragalus are about the same size and slightly larger than the
calcaneum, but all three elements are smaller and thinner than the
epipodials; the calcaneum, like the fibula, becomes slightly narrower
towards the posterior margin. The six elements more distal to these are
arranged into three digits, with two, three, and two elements
respectively (anterior to posterior). These are also rounded, discoidal
elements that become smaller and thinner distally. They retain pitted
margins, and there would have been thick cartilage separating these
elements, forming the hydrodynamical contours of the hindlimb. Whether
this represents a complete hindlimb is uncertain.

#### Genus BRACHYPTERYGIUS [Huene, -@Huene1922b] {#Brachypterygius}

[\[BrachypterygiusTypespecies\]]{#BrachypterygiusTypespecies
label="BrachypterygiusTypespecies"}

Designated as *Ichthyosaurus extremus* by @Boulenger1904 [425];
described from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation of Weymouth, Dorset, United
Kingdom.

[\[BrachypterygiusOtherspecies\]]{#BrachypterygiusOtherspecies
label="BrachypterygiusOtherspecies"}

None, but see discussion below
([\[BrachypterygiusDiscussion\]](#BrachypterygiusDiscussion){reference-type="ref"
reference="BrachypterygiusDiscussion"}).

[\[BrachypterygiusDiagnosis\]]{#BrachypterygiusDiagnosis
label="BrachypterygiusDiagnosis"}

As for monotypic species below.

[\[BrachypterygiusEtymology\]]{#BrachypterygiusEtymology
label="BrachypterygiusEtymology"}

The generic name *Brachypterygius* is derived from the Greek *βραχύς*
'short' and *πτέρυγα* 'wing', from the relatively short and broad
holotype forelimb.

[\[BrachypterygiusDiscussion\]]{#BrachypterygiusDiscussion
label="BrachypterygiusDiscussion"}

@Boulenger1904a erected the species *Ichthyosaurus extremus* for the new
specimen he described (NHMUK PV R3177). @Huene1922b considered the
configuration of the forelimb, particularly the distal humeral
articulations, sufficient to place this species in the new genus
*Brachypterygius*. As only the forelimb was known, little other material
was referred to this taxon. With the finding of a new, large ichthyosaur
skull from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation (CAMSM J68516), @McGowan1976
erected *Grendelius mordax*. He included a discussion on the validity of
Upper Jurassic ichthyosaur taxa (excluding *Ophthalmosaurus*);
*Brachypterygius extremus* was not discussed. @Kirton1983 re-described
the material for both of these taxa, suggesting that the two genera
might be synonymous (pp 134--135), but refrained from a formal proposal
as there was no overlapping diagnostic material. A new specimen, also
from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation (BRSMG Ce 16696), of a largely
complete ichthyosaur provided evidence to support Kirton's view, and
*Brachypterygius* and *Grendelius* were duly synonymised by
@McGowan1997a. Previous research has regarded *Brachypterygius
cantabrigiensis* [Lydekker, -@Lydekker1888] from the Cambridge Greensand
(Albian, Lower Cretaceous) as a member of this genus [@McGowan2003], but
a recent review of this material [@Fischer2014a] considers this
non-diagnostic. Remains from the cretaceous Purbeck Limestone may be
referable to *Brachypterygius*, however, the material is not certainly
attributable to any genus [@Delair1968a; @Ensom2009].

@Efimov1998 named *Otschevia pseudoscythica* from the Tithonian of
Russia. The partial forelimb included in the material differs from the
holotype of *Brachypterygius* in having five digits instead of six. Few
other differences are present, which led @Maisch2000c [p. 87] and
@McGowan2003 [p. 115] to consider *Otschevia* as a junior subjective
synonym of *Brachypterygius*. @Fernandez1997 [p. 752, fig. 1] referred
specimen CMNH 47525 to *Brachypterygius* sp. based upon the small
extracondylar area, large articular condyle that is not offset from the
extracondylar area, poorly defined stapedial facets, and lack of
basioccipital peg. These characters do not diagnose the specimen to
genus or species level, and can be found in several
Platypterygiinae-type ichthyosaurs, such as *Platypterygius* and
*Sveltonectes* [@Broili1909; @Fischer2011].

The genus *Brachypterygius* may be characterised *in partim* by a
premaxilla--jugal contact, and three distal facets on the humerus, the
middle of which is the smallest and articulates with the intermedium.
This separates the humerus from *Ophthalmosaurus, Mollesaurus,* and
*Undorosaurus*, also with three distal humeral facets, but the anterior
facet is the smallest and articulates with a preaxial accessory element.
*Aegirosaurus* has the same distal humeral configuration as
*Brachypterygius* and can be separated by having more elements in each
digit (see
[\[BextremusDiagnosis\]](#BextremusDiagnosis){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusDiagnosis"}), and a larger radial facet than the
ulnar facet [@Bardet2000; @McGowan2003]. Similarly, *Maiaspondylus* also
has the same configuration of distal humeral facets. The humerus of
*Maiaspondylus* can be separated from *Brachypterygius* as the former
taxon has equally expanded proximal and distal portions, whereas in
*Brachypterygius*, the distal humerus is anteroposteriorly longer
expanded compared to the proximal humerus [@Maxwell2006a]. However, as
the known material of *Maiasaurus* is juvenile, this may be a result of
ontogenetic variation [@Johnson1979; @Maxwell2006a].

[\[Bextremus\]]{#Bextremus label="Bextremus"}

rlp13cm v\* & [-@Boulenger1904] & *Ichthyosaurus extremus* Boulenger;
p. 424, fig. 83 \[Kimmeridge Clay Formation (Kimmeridgian Stage),
Smallmouth Sands?, Weymouth, Dorset, UK\].\
v . & [-@Boulenger1904a] & *Ichthyosaurus extremus* Boulenger; p. 18.\
v & [-@Huene1922b] & *Brachypterygius extremus* (Boulenger); von Huene,
pp 91, 97--98, pl. 19, fig. 9.\
& *[-@Kuhn1934]* & *Brachypterygius extremus* Boulenger; Kuhn, p. 45.\
v & *[-@Delair1959]* & *Macropterygius dilatatus* (Phillips); Delair,
p. 65 \[Kimmeridge Clay Formation (Kimmeridgian Stage), Swindon, UK\].\
v & [-@McGowan1976] & *Grendelius mordax* McGowan; p. 671--674, figs 1,
2 A--C, F, 3 \[Kimmeridge Clay Formation (Kimmeridgian Stage),
Stowbridge, UK\].\
& *[-@Mazin1982]* & *Grendelius mordax* Mc Gowan \[*sic.*\]; Mazin,
p. 97.\
\[v & [-@Kirton1983] & *Brachypterygius extremus* (Boulenger); Kirton,
p. 129--134, figs 40, 41.\]\
\[v & [-@Kirton1983] & *Grendelius mordax* McGowan; Kirton, p. 110--121,
figs 37, 38, pl. 4.\]\
v & [-@Delair1985] & *Brachypterygius extremus* (Boulenger); Delair, pp
131--132, fig. 3 \[Kimmeridge Clay Formation, Smallmouth Sands, UK\].\
? & [-@Fernandez1997] & *Brachypterygius* sp. Huene; Fernández, p. 752,
fig. 1 \[Portlandian Stage, Ankilivalo, Madagascar\].\
v & [-@McGowan1997a] & *Brachypterygius extremus* (Boulenger); McGowan,
p. 430, fig. 2 A, B.\
v & [-@Arkhangelsky1998] & *Brachypterygius zhuravlevi* Arkhangelsky; pp
90--91, fig. 4 \[*Dorsoplanites panderi* Zone (Volgian Stage),
Krasnopartizanskaya District, Russia\].\
v & [-@Efimov1998] & *Otschevia pseudoscythica* Efimov; p. 83, figs 1--4
\[*Ilowaiskya pseudoscythica* Zone (Volgian Stage), Ulyanovsk Oblast,
Russia\].\
& *[-@Motani1999c]* & *Brachypterygius extremus* (Boulenger); Motani,
p. 485.\
& [-@Arkhangelsky2000] & *Otschevia zhuravlevi* (Arkhangelsky);
Arkhangelsky, p. 550, figs 1, 2 \[*Dorsoplanites panderi* Zone (Volgian
Stage), Krasnopartizanskaya District, Russia\].\
& *[-@Maisch2000c]* & *Brachypterygius extremus* (Boulenger); Maisch &
Matzke, p. 79--80, fig. 29 (*pars.*).\
& [-@McGowan2003] & *Brachypterygius extremus* (Boulenger); McGowan &
Motani, p. 117, fig. 94, pl. 18.\
& *[-@Maxwell2006a]* & *Brachypterygius extremus* (Boulenger); Maxwell &
Caldwell, pp 1048--1050, fig. 6 B (mod. [@Motani1999c]).\
& *[-@Maisch2010]* & *Brachypterygius extremus* (Boulenger); Maisch,
p. 166.\
. & *[-@Maisch2010]* & *Brachypterygius mordax* (McGowan); Maisch,
p. 166.

[\[BextremusType\]]{#BextremusType label="BextremusType"}

Holotype: NHMUK PV R3177
([1.33](#fig:Bextremus-forelimb){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-forelimb"}), an embedded right forelimb
designated by @Boulenger1904 [p. 424, fig. 83c]. This specimen comprises
humerus, radius, ulna, radiale, ulnare, intermedium, and fifty-two other
elements. Some of the forelimb elements have been replaced in an
unnatural position and are now held in plaster. The forelimb is exposed
in dorsal view, and is currently on display in the Marine Reptiles
Gallery of NHMUK. See the discussion below for locality and horizon.

[\[BextremusMaterial\]]{#BextremusMaterial label="BextremusMaterial"}

BRSMG Ce 16696
([\[fig:Bextremus-BRSMG,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body\]](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body"}),
a largely complete but only partially prepared specimen from Kimmeridge
Bay, Dorset. The skull and right forelimb in ventral view and partial
distal left forelimb are exposed.

Specimens in CAMSM: J29864
([1.33](#fig:Bextremus-forelimb){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-forelimb"}b), a left forelimb, J61348, a
basisphenoid, and J67556 ([\[pl33\]](#pl33){reference-type="ref"
reference="pl33"}, figs 1--3), a right humerus, all from Ely,
Cambridgeshire; J68516 and TN 571.11
([\[fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-basicranium,pl28\]](#fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-basicranium,pl28){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-basicranium,pl28"}),
a large but poorly preserved skull with associated post cranial elements
from Stowbridge, Norfolk, originally referred to *Grendelius mordax*;
X39251
([\[pl26,pl27,pl29,pl30,pl31,pl32\]](#pl26,pl27,pl29,pl30,pl31,pl32){reference-type="ref"
reference="pl26,pl27,pl29,pl30,pl31,pl32"}), a largely complete but
disarticulated skeleton from Mepal, Cambridgeshire (many parts to
X39251, but not all, are labelled with with letter suffixes that are
indicated in the descriptions below). Additionally, part of this
specimen is not ichthyosaurian.

Specimens in NHMUK PV: R8693, pectoral girdle and forelimb elements from
Encombe Bay, Dorset; 40337, a basisphenoid, and 41776, 45905 and 45907,
basioccipitals, from Weymouth, Dorset; 42284, a right humerus, and
42286, a left humerus from the Isle of Portland, Dorset; 45984, a
basioccipital and basisphenoid, 45986, a left articular, and 47326, a
basisphenoid from Swindon, Wiltshire.

Specimens in OUMNH: J1585, a left humerus, J1586, a right humerus,
J1608, left humerus, and J1627, a basioccipital, all from the 'Portland
Rock' (Portland Stone Formation) of Swindon, Wiltshire; J68537, a
basioccipital from an unknown horizon and locality; J68543, a
basioccipital from Cumnor, Oxfordshire.

Specimen in WESTM: 1978.219 ([\[pl33\]](#pl33){reference-type="ref"
reference="pl33"}, fig.4), a left forelimb from Smallmouth Sands, near
Weymouth, Dorset. This is possibly the contralateral forelimb to the
holotype.

All of the above specimens are from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation unless
noted
([\[tbl:Bextremus-specimens\]](#tbl:Bextremus-specimens){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:Bextremus-specimens"}). The material is assigned based on
the similarity with the type limb material -- three distal humeral
facets, large dorsal and ventral processes, polygonal limb elements --
or in comparison with skull material of CAMSM J69516 and TN 571.11 --
basioccipital with narrow extracondylar area and dorsally positioned
notochordal pit; basisphenoid with well-offset basipterygoid processes,
ventrally positioned carotid foramen, pentagonal form posteriorly.

![*Brachypterygius extremus* [Boulenger, -@Boulenger1904]: skull (CAMSM
J68516) in left lateral view (**a**) and interpretation (**b**).
Abbreviations: **an**, angular; **d**, dentary; **en**, external naris;
**fr**, frontal; **j**, jugal; **l**, lachrymal; **m**, maxilla; **n**,
nasal; **p**, premaxilla; **pf**, postfrontal; **po**, postorbital;
**pr**, prefrontal; **qj**, quadratojugal; **sa**, surangular; **sc**,
sclerotic plate. Scale bar represents 200 mm. Photograph courtesy
Sedgwick Museum, Cambridge, used with permission.
[\[fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull\]]{#fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull
label="fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull"}](./img/fig-Bextremus-CAMSM-skull.png){#fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull
width="\\textwidth"}

![image](./img/fig-Bextremus-BRSMG.png){width="19cm"}

[\[BextremusDiagnosis\]]{#BextremusDiagnosis label="BextremusDiagnosis"}

Moderately large to large (jaw length up to 1230 mm) member of
Ophthalmosauridae with the following unique combination of characters:
robust rostrum, snout ratio 0.567--0.905 (more gracile in
*Ophthalmosaurus, Nannopterygius, Aegirosaurus*); premaxilla contacts
jugal ventral to the external naris (autapomorphy); anterior tips of
premaxillae and dentaries rounded (tapering and separate in
*Ophthalmosaurus*); supranarial process of premaxilla extends over
one-third of external naris (reduced in *Cryopterygius*; does not
contact jugal in *Ophthalmosaurus, Cryopterygius, Maiaspondylus,
Platypterygius*); dorsal rostrum squared in narial region (trapezoidal
in *Ophthalmosaurus*); broad anterior jugal fan covering the maxilla and
lachrymal laterally (narrower in *Ophthalmosaurus, Caypullisaurus,
Platypterygius*); lachrymal contacts external naris (does not in
*Cryopterygius, Platypterygius australis*); prefrontal excluded from
contact with external naris by nasal and lachrymal (shared with
*Cryopterygius, Ophthalmosaurus, Palvennia, Platypterygius*; contacts in
*Aegirosaurus*); postorbital does not exclude quadratojugal in lateral
view (shared with *Cryopterygius, Platypterygius*; quadratojugal
excluded in *Aegirosaurus, Ophthalmosaurus, Palvennia?*); teeth
relatively large (smaller in *Ophthalmosaurus, Aegirosaurus,
Sveltonectes*); narrow postorbital region (wider in *Cryopterygius,
Platypterygius*); basioccipital with narrow extracondylar area (broader
in *Ophthalmosaurus, Mollesaurus*); notochordal pit on basioccipital
condyle placed dorsally (central in *Ophthalmosaurus*); posterior border
of coracoid straight and oblique (rounded in *Ophthalmosaurus,
Acamptonectes*; transverse in *Cryopterygius, Platypterygius*); humerus
with three distal facets, middle distal humeral facet is smallest and
articulates with the intermedium (middle facet is largest and
articulates with the radius in *Ophthalmosaurus, Caypullisaurus,
Arthropterygius*); proximal elements of the accessory digits
teardrop-shaped (rounded in *Ophthalmosaurus, Caypullisaurus*; polygonal
in *Sveltonectes, Platypterygius*); anterior accessory element is
positioned anterior to the radius and almost contacts the humerus
proximally (shared with *Cryopterygius*; anterior accessory element
positioned distally to the radius in *Aegirosaurus*; contacts the
humerus in *Acamptonectes, Ophthalmosaurus*); five or six digits (six in
*Ophthalmosaurus*); phalanges are rounded quadrangles (round in
*Ophthalmosaurus, Arthropterygius*; polygonal in *Platypterygius,
Sveltonectes*).

[\[BextremusEtymology\]]{#BextremusEtymology label="BextremusEtymology"}

The specific name *extremus* is Latin for 'extreme' or 'broad', most
likely referring to the breadth or shortness of the holotype forelimb.

[\[BextremusOccurrence\]]{#BextremusOccurrence
label="BextremusOccurrence"}

Material referable to *Brachypterygius extremus* is known from the
Kimmeridgian--Tithonian of southern England. Further remains are known
from France and Russia.

[\[BextremusDiscussion\]]{#BextremusDiscussion
label="BextremusDiscussion"}

The original notice of *Ichthyosaurus extremus* was given by Boulenger
at a meeting of the Zoological Society of London. An abstract of this
meeting [@Boulenger1904a] was published after an article in which
Boulenger formally diagnosed *Ichthyosaurus extremus* [@Boulenger1904].
Boulenger originally noted that the holotype's (NHMUK PV R3177) horizon
and locality were unknown [@Boulenger1904 424]. Mr Horace B. Woodward
examined the matrix of the specimen and suggested it originated from the
Lower Lias of Weston, near Bath [@Boulenger1904 426; @Boulenger1904a].
@Andrews1910 [54] noted the similarity between NHMUK PV R3177 and a
humerus in the Passmore Collection (OUMNH J1608), suggesting that both
likely derived from the same horizon: the Kimmeridge Clay Formation.
This is strongly supported by a forelimb from the Kimmeridge Clay
Formation of Weymouth (WESTM 1978.219) that may belong to the same
individual as NHMUK PV R3177
([\[fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33\]](#fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33"}, fig. 4; [@Delair1985], pl. 3).
Following @McGowan1997a synonymising *Grendelius* with
*Brachypterygius*, he refrained from synonymising *Brachypterygius
mordax* with *Brachypterygius extremus,* citing lack of preparation of
specimen BRSMG Ce 16696, and a need for reexamination of the type
material CAMSM J68516 and NHMUK PV R3177. @McGowan2003 [117] considered
the differences in forelimb configuration (five digits versus six) to be
of insufficient taxonomic value and synonymised *Brachypterygius mordax*
with *Brachypterygius extremus*. However, @Maisch2010 maintained
*Brachypterygius mordax* as a separate species. Examination of the three
specimens, NHMUK PV R3177, CAMSM J68516, and BRSMG Ce 16696, suggests
that all belong to the same species, and therefore *Brachypterygius
mordax* is considered a subjective junior synonym of *Brachypterygius
extremus*.

*Brachypterygius zhuravlevi* [Arkhangelsky, -@Arkhangelsky1998] was
erected based on a partial forelimb, but it was later referred to
*Otschevia zhuravlevi* [@Arkhangelsky2000]. The material referred to
this taxon is consistent with *Brachypterygius pseudoscythica* and
synonymised as suggested by @Maisch2000c [79]. @McGowan2003 [155]
considered *Brachypterygius pseudoscythica* and *Brachypterygius
zhuravlevi* to be subjective junior synonyms of *Brachypterygius
extremus*. The brief descriptions of these taxa make detailed
comparisons difficult, but the most obvious difference between
*Brachypterygius pseudoscythica, Brachypterygius zhuravlevi,* and
*Brachypterygius extremus* seems to be the number of elements in the
forelimb [e.g. @Efimov1998 fig. 4]. This feature is highly variable in
other ichthyosaur taxa and not considered be diagnostic at the species
level, therefore *Brachypterygius pseudoscythica* and *Brachypterygius
zhuravlevi* are regarded as junior subjective synonyms of
*Brachypterygius extremus*. Some material previously referred to
*Ichthyosaurus trigonus* (e.g.  NHMUK PV 42284) is referable to
*Brachypterygius extremus*. This taxon is considered a *nomen dubium*
(see [\[Itrigonus\]](#Itrigonus){reference-type="ref"
reference="Itrigonus"}) and the original material and description did
not include any diagnostic features; it is likely a collection of bones
that may be referred to other taxa.

[\[BextremusPremaxilla\]]{#BextremusPremaxilla
label="BextremusPremaxilla"}

The premaxilla in *Brachypterygius extremus* is more robust than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, particularly anteriorly, but is largely
similar in shape
([\[fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull,tbl:Bextremus-skull-measurements\]](#fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull,tbl:Bextremus-skull-measurements){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull,tbl:Bextremus-skull-measurements"}).
Anteriorly, the tips of the two premaxillae are not separated: no tissue
would have intervened as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The tips also
terminate more bluntly than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, which is
particularly clear in CAMSM J68516, a result of the more robust build.
This robustness was measured by the snout depth ratio as described by
([@McGowan1976 676]: \[10 × snout depth at midpoint\] ÷ jaw length). For
BRSMG Ce 16696, it is (10 × 45.9 mm)/810 mm = 0.567, and for CAMSM
J68516, (10 × 111.3 mm)/1230 mm = 0.905
([\[tbl:Bextremus-skull-measurements\]](#tbl:Bextremus-skull-measurements){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:Bextremus-skull-measurements"}). The considerable
difference between these two results may be an effect of the crushing of
CAMSM J68516. This is similar to McGowan's [-@McGowan1976] value;
@Kirton1983 calculated the snout ratio for CAMSM J68516 as 0.80 and for
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* as 0.65 (see
[\[OicenicusPremaxilla\]](#OicenicusPremaxilla){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusPremaxilla"}).

lllS Element & Measurement & Specimen & Length\
Premaxilla & Anteroposterior length & BRSMG Ce 16696 & 545\
& & CAMSM J68516 & 750\
Orbit & Greatest diameter & CAMSM J68516 & 215\
& & BRSMG Ce 16696 & 148\
Quadrate & Dorsoventral height & CAMSM X39251 & 176\
Exoccipital & Dorsoventral height & CAMSM TN571.11 & 37.9\
Mandible & Anteroposterior length & CAMSM J68516 & 1230\
& & BRSMG Ce 16696 & 810\

\

![*Brachypterygius extremus* [Boulenger, -@Boulenger1904]: skull (BRSMG
Ce 16696) in left lateral view composite photograph (**a**) and
interpretation (**b**). The skull is preserved in two portions separated
by the line of fracture (**F**): the anterior portion is completely
prepared, while the posterior portion has not nor is it as well
preserved. Photographs in a true orthogonal view to the specimen (see
also
[\[fig:Bextremus-BRSMG\]](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG"}) were taken of these two pieces
separately and are combined above (**a**). Abbreviations: **an**,
angular; **d**, dentary; **en**, external naris; **h?**, possible hyoid
bones; **j**, jugal; **l**, lachrymal; **m**, maxilla; **n**, nasal;
**p**, premaxilla; **pf**, postfrontal; **po**, postorbital; **pr**,
prefrontal; **pt**, pterygoid; **q**, quadrate; **qj**, quadratojugal;
**sa**, surangular; **sc**, sclerotic plates; **sp**, splenial; **?**,
identity uncertain. Scale bar represents 200 mm. Photograph courtesy
Simon Powell/University of Bristol, used with permission; illustration
by Benjamin Moon.
[\[fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull\]]{#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull
label="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull"}](./img/fig-Bextremus-BRSMG-skull.png){#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull
width="\\textwidth"}

Laterally, there is a longitudinal groove that becomes discontinuous
anteriorly and opens into foramina that would likely have led to the
internal part of the snout. Posteriorly, the premaxillae become more
square dorsally than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, a character state
that is continued posteriorly by the nasals (see
[\[BextremusNasal\]](#BextremusNasal){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusNasal"}). The dorsal contact between the two
premaxillae appears to be a simple butt joint. Posteriorly, the
premaxilla meets and diverges around the external naris. The dorsal
narial process appears to be small, smaller than the ventral process, in
BRSMG Ce 16696, extending for about one-third of the external narial
length, although this area is poorly preserved. The ventral process
borders much of the ventral border of the external naris, meeting and
overlapping the lachrymal posteriorly to exclude the maxilla from the
external naris in lateral view. Fragments of the premaxilla are
preserved in CAMSM X39251, but these offer no detail of the internal
anatomy. The alveolar groove is present along the length of the
premaxilla and holds about 28 teeth, similar to *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*.

[\[BextremusMaxilla\]]{#BextremusMaxilla label="BextremusMaxilla"}

The maxilla is almost entirely covered by the premaxilla, lachrymal and
jugal in lateral view
([\[fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull\]](#fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull"}). Only
the ventral portion is exposed and this extends along much of the
ventral margin of the rostrum, further anteriorly than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. It is excluded from the border of the
external naris in lateral view by the meeting of the premaxilla and
lachrymal, and has a small contact with the overlying jugal also (see
[\[BextremusJugal\]](#BextremusJugal){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusJugal"}). A fragment of maxilla is preserved in
CAMSM X39251, but shows little detail; outwardly, the maxilla has the
same form as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* (see
[\[OicenicusMaxilla\]](#OicenicusMaxilla){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusMaxilla"}).

[\[BextremusNasal\]]{#BextremusNasal label="BextremusNasal"}

The nasals are exposed for less than one-quarter of the pre-narial
rostral length, and extend posteriorly dorsal to the orbit
([\[fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull\]](#fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull"}).
Dorsolaterally, they are square, which adds to the robust appearance of
the snout. The nasals form the dorsal border of the external naris
posterior to the dorsal narial process of the maxilla, and the margin of
the nasal is smoothed and rounded along this border. As in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, the posterior portion of the dorsal narial
border is drawn laterally into a small, delicate triangular flange. This
appears more strongly developed in CAMSM J68516, but the narial regions
of this specimen and BRSMG Ce 16696 are heavily fragmented. The nasal
meets the lachrymal at the posterior of the external naris and excludes
the prefrontal from participating in the border of the external naris.
The suture between the right and left nasals also seems to be a simple
butt joint, as with the premaxilla (see
[\[BextremusPremaxilla\]](#BextremusPremaxilla){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusPremaxilla"}). There is no foramen, but an
*excavatio internasalis* is present. Posteriorly, the nasals are
deflected dorsally around the orbit and spread laterally to form a large
part of the anterior portion of the skull roof. Here they are bordered
by the prefrontal and postfrontal laterally and the frontals
posteriorly, which they seem to underlap substantially.

[\[BextremusLachrymal\]]{#BextremusLachrymal label="BextremusLachrymal"}

The lachrymal is well exposed in BRSMG Ce 16696, as the jugal and
prefrontal, which overlap much of it, have been partly broken and
removed
([\[fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull\]](#fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull"}). It
has the triradiate form seen in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* but the main
body is relatively larger anteroposteriorly, separating the external
naris and orbit, and possibly creating a less elongate external naris.
The anterior process forms a portion of the ventral margin of the
external naris, meeting and underlapping the ventral narial process of
the premaxilla anteriorly. Posteriorly, the dorsal process is overlapped
by the narial process of the prefrontal, possibly excluding the
prefrontal from the external naris. The posteroventral portion of the
main body of the lachrymal is overlapped extensively by the jugal,
although it is exposed dorsally and extends posteriorly along the dorsal
margin of the jugal bar, forming the ventral margin of the orbit. The
orbital process of the lachrymal extends for about one-half of the
orbital length, longer than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* (see
[\[OicenicusLachrymal\]](#OicenicusLachrymal){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusLachrymal"}), but in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* the
anterior portion of the jugal does not cover the lachrymal. The
supraorbital crest is present in *Brachypterygius extremus* and well
developed, continuing onto the prefrontal dorsally. The posterior margin
of the lachrymal is strongly smoothed and rounded to form the anterior
orbital margin.

[\[BextremusPrefrontal\]]{#BextremusPrefrontal
label="BextremusPrefrontal"}

Lateral crushing in BRSMG Ce 16696 has flattened the supraorbital crest
of the prefrontal and it appears larger than it should
([1.30](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull"}). As in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, it forms a strong anteroposterior orbital margin between the
lachrymal anteroventrally and the postfrontal posterodorsally. The
lachrymal contact is broken ventrally, but there was significant overlap
between the two elements. The prefrontal of CAMSM J68516 seems to be
smaller than in BRSMG Ce 16696, and in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
[@Kirton1983]; a result of the comparatively smaller orbit in CAMSM
J68516. The posterior contact with the postfrontal is complex and
interdigitating, with the postfrontal largely overlapping the prefrontal
dorsal to the midpoint of the orbit. The ventral surface of the
prefrontal is broadened by the large supraorbital crest and is slightly
concave both anteroposteriorly, following the orbit, and laterally.
Dorsally, the nasal overlaps the prefrontal, but this contact cannot be
seen clearly.

[\[BextremusFrontal\]]{#BextremusFrontal label="BextremusFrontal"}

The frontals are not well preserved in any available specimens of
*Brachypterygius extremus*: their size is unknown in BRSMG Ce 16696 as
they are still held within the matrix, and in CAMSM J68516 they are
largely fragmentary [@Kirton1983].

[\[BextremusParietal\]]{#BextremusParietal label="BextremusParietal"}

Specimen CAMSM X39251bj preserves most of the left parietal, which has a
similar form to the parietal of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[pl26\]](#pl26){reference-type="ref" reference="pl26"}, figs 1, 2).
The dorsal surface is smooth, and laterally convex anteriorly,
descending laterally to form the medial wall of the supratemporal
fenestra. The anterolateral portion is longitudinally grooved for
articulation with the anteromedial portion of the postfrontal and the
posterior portion of the frontal. Posteriorly, the medial portion of the
dorsal parietal is concave. The medial surface is irregular and aligned
sagittally to articulate with the contralateral parietal. Laterally, the
posterior margin of the parietal is raised into low median flange, with
an elongate concavity ventrally. The posterior of the parietal is
deflected posterolaterally into a large process that articulates with
the supratemporal; the posterolateral surface of this process is
flattened. Ventrally, the surface of the parietal is incompletely
prepared in CAMSM X39251. Anteriorly, the ventral surface is laterally
concave, but posteriorly, it extends ventrally along the lateral and
medial margins to form the broad supratemporal wall and parietal facet
respectively.

[\[BextremusPostfrontal\]]{#BextremusPostfrontal
label="BextremusPostfrontal"}

The postfrontal is a major part of the posterodorsal orbital margin and
of the skull. The left postfrontal is well preserved in specimen CAMSM
X39251ai ([\[pl26\]](#pl26){reference-type="ref" reference="pl26"}, figs
3, 4). This is an elongate, curved element that forms the lateral border
to the skull roof and the anterior and lateral borders to the
supratemporal fenestra. It is largely similar to *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, but somewhat narrower in *Brachypterygius extremus*,
reflecting the relatively smaller orbit. Anteriorly, the postfrontal is
broad and flattened, and the dorsal surface is roughened where it would
have been overlapped by the frontal medially. Posterior to this broad
section, the postfrontal undergoes torsion as the posterior process
becomes more dorsoventrally oriented. Medially, the margin of the
postfrontal is strongly rounded and smooth as it forms the anterior and
lateral margins to the supratemporal fenestra. The posterior portion of
the postfrontal tapers posteriorly. Ventrally, this portion is ridged to
separate it from the ventral surface of the postfrontal, which forms
much of the dorsal surface of the orbital margin. This area is broadened
by the development of the supraorbital flange laterally. A series of
ridges and grooves anteriorly mark the contact with the prefrontal
ventrally. At the anteromedialmost extent of the postfrontal
contribution to the margin of the supratemporal fenestra, the
postfrontal has a small facet, similar to that in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, which may contact the parietal. The contact with the
postorbital is not clear, but is extensive in BRSMG Ce 16696, forming an
interdigitating contact along the ventral surface. The posterior part of
the ventral surface of the postfrontal is ridged posteriorly, where it
would have been underlapped by the anterior process of the
supratemporal.

[\[BextremusSupratemporal\]]{#BextremusSupratemporal
label="BextremusSupratemporal"}

A portion of the left supratemporal is present in CAMSM X39251bt
([\[pl26\]](#pl26){reference-type="ref" reference="pl26"}, figs 5, 6).
This preserves much of the anterior and medial rami, reconstructed from
several fragments; the ventral ramus has been broken. The anterior ramus
extends anteriorly, curving slightly medially and tapering anteriorly.
This ramus is oriented subvertically, with longitudinal grooves and
ridges on the external (lateral) surface that interlock with their
counterparts on the internal surface of the postfrontal (see
[\[BextremusPostfrontal\]](#BextremusPostfrontal){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusPostfrontal"}); the extent of this contact is marked
by a low ridge. The dorsomedial margin of the anterior ramus is smoothed
and rounded to form the posterolateral margin to the supratemporal
fenestra, continuing posteriorly from the postfrontal. The internal
surface appears slightly roughened, probably for muscle attachment, as
suggested in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* above
([\[OicenicusSupratemporal\]](#OicenicusSupratemporal){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusSupratemporal"}). Posterior to this facet, the three
rami meet and the posterolateral apex of the supratemporal is drawn into
a slight tubercle, not as well developed as in some specimens of
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The bone surface is roughened for attachment
of muscle slips. The medial ramus is a robust spur of bone that would
meet the posterolateral process of the parietal. The parietal facet is
large, oblique, and triangular, situated at the distal end of the medial
ramus of the supratemporal, but incomplete ventrally. In the middle of
the posterior face is a small shelf of bone that may mark the dorsalmost
portion of the opisthotic facet, as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.
However, this area, and much of the ventral ramus, is poorly preserved.

[\[BextremusPostorbital\]]{#BextremusPostorbital
label="BextremusPostorbital"}

The postorbital is a narrow, subtriangular element that forms much of
the posterior border of the orbit; it is not well known in
*Brachypterygius*
([1.30](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull"}). Dorsally, the postorbital
contacts the ventral postfrontal and extends ventrally to contact and
cover the dorsal process of the jugal laterally. The postorbital is
similar in form to that of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, including a small
portion of the supraorbital flange developed dorsally in BRSMG Ce 16696.
The postorbital in BRSMG Ce 16696 is broken, but is associated with
another element that is interpreted as the quadratojugal (see
[\[BextremusQuadratojugal\]](#BextremusQuadratojugal){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusQuadratojugal"}).

[\[BextremusQuadratojugal\]]{#BextremusQuadratojugal
label="BextremusQuadratojugal"}

The quadratojugal is largely exposed in BRSMG Ce 16696
([1.30](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull"}). It is a subtriangular bone in
the lateral cheek region. The quadrate facet and the posterior corner of
the quadratojugal is broken posterodorsally. Specimen CAMSM X39251
preserves a more complete example of what is interpreted as the left
quadratojugal ([\[pl26\]](#pl26){reference-type="ref" reference="pl26"},
figs 7, 8). This shows a similar form to that of *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, although it is proportionally larger. The facets for contact
with the surrounding bones are less distinct than in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, being surrounded by smaller ridges. The facets for the
postorbital and squamosal also appear narrower than those in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, however, they are not well preserved on this
specimen. @Kirton1983 inferred the presence of a quadratojugal in CAMSM
J68516 with a pointed-elliptical cross-section and a small section of
the curved anterodorsal margin. This specimen shows the jugal overlying
the quadratojugal, although this probably arose from displacement.

[\[BextremusJugal\]]{#BextremusJugal label="BextremusJugal"}

The jugal is present in BRSMG Ce 16696 and forms a long
[J]{.sans-serif}-shaped bar ventral to the orbit (). It covers much of
the lateral maxilla anteriorly; the dorsal portion may cover much of the
lachrymal as well, but is broken. At its anteriormost tip, the jugal
contacts the posterior of the subnarial process of the premaxilla,
excluding the maxilla from external contact with the external naris.
Therefore, anteriorly, the jugal is broader than in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*. The main part of the horizontal bar is curved ventral to the
orbit, widening and becoming shallower posteriorly. This forms a shelf
ventral to the orbit with a distinct dorsal ridge that may mark
attachment for muscles. A rounded heel is developed at the
posteroventral corner of the jugal, as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.
The dorsal margin is curved dorsally where the jugal is developed into a
dorsal process; the extent of this is not known as it is covered by the
quadratojugal.

[\[BextremusOrbit\]]{#BextremusOrbit label="BextremusOrbit"}

Specimen BRSMG Ce 16696 appears to preserve a complete sclerotic ring,
although this is fragmented and the sutures between the plates are
difficult to determine (); several complete and fragmented sclerotic
plates are preserved with CAMSM X39251
([\[pl27\]](#pl27){reference-type="ref" reference="pl27"}, figs 8--11).
It is likely that there are about 14 sclerotic plates in total, about
the same as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. Although they have been
crushed, they still show evidence of the convex curvature that is also
found in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The orbit itself is much smaller
than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. McGowan's [-@McGowan1976] orbital
ratio gives values of 215 mm/1230 mm = 0.174 in CAMSM J68516, and 147.6
mm/810 mm = 0.182 in BRSMG Ce 16696 (compare NHMUK PV R3013: 0.28;
[\[tbl:Bextremus-skull-measurements\]](#tbl:Bextremus-skull-measurements){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:Bextremus-skull-measurements"}).

[\[BextremusVomer\]]{#BextremusVomer label="BextremusVomer"}

Portions of the right and left vomers are preserved in CAMSM X39251;
both represent the near-posterior raised portion that formed the medial
choanal walls ([\[pl27\]](#pl27){reference-type="ref" reference="pl27"},
figs 1, 2). The vomer is raised dorsally into a sagittally-aligned,
anteroposteriorly convex, but dorsoventrally concave dorsal sheet. The
dorsal part of this has subparallel dorsoventral ridges along the
surface, and is pierced by foramina. Anterodorsally, the base of a
process is preserved that may have been similar to the more elongate
processes in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. Ventrally on this surface, on
the anterior part of the region preserved, is a larger foramen that
traverses the vomer posteromedially to the medial surface. As in the
vomer of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, this portion of the vomer is
interpreted an the medial choanal wall. Ventrally, the vomer broadens to
form a larger basal plate. The anterior part of the lateral surface of
the basal plate is formed into a long, triangular facet that articulates
with the palatine. Posterior to this facet, the basal portion of the
vomer becomes lower and is pierced by anteroventrally--posterodorsally
elongate foramina. At the posterior end of the preserved portion, the
ventrolateral surface of the vomer is irregular: a longitudinal groove
is surrounded dorsally and ventrally by uneven ridges that separate it
from the choanal wall dorsally, and the ventral surface. Only the
ventral portion of the medial surface of the vomer is well preserved.
There is a channel that becomes dorsoventrally narrower posteriorly,
interpreted as the pterygoid facet. The surface of this facet is pierced
by foramina from the lateral surface. The ventral surface of the vomer
is a flattened, smooth surface that narrows anteriorly, and is broad to
the posterior end of the preserved portion.

[\[BextremusPterygoid\]]{#BextremusPterygoid label="BextremusPterygoid"}

Much of the posterior part of the pterygoid is exposed in ventral view
in BRSMG Ce 16696 and has a similar form to that of *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* ([1.30](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull"}). This bone is emarginated
posteriorly, separating the palatal and quadrate rami. The lateral wing
is exposed and is shorter and broader than in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*; the distal margin is well rounded and has a slight rugosity,
suggesting that it would have held muscle or ligament attachments. At
the anterior of the pterygoid, the suture with the palatine may be
present, but this is uncertain. The pterygoid is the best represented
palatal element in CAMSM X39251bh, but only the posterior portion of the
right pterygoid is preserved ([\[pl27\]](#pl27){reference-type="ref"
reference="pl27"}, figs 3, 4). This has three posterior flanges, dorsal,
lateral, and medial, that articulate with the quadrate (dorsal and
lateral flanges) and with the basisphenoid medially, but the specimen
has been dorsoventrally crushed. The lateral margin is rounded and the
pterygoid expands laterally towards its posterior end. There is a large
dorsolateral concavity to accept the pterygoid lamella of the quadrate
between the lateral and dorsal flanges. Ventrally, the surface of the
pterygoid is smoother than the dorsal surface and becomes concave
posteriorly between the lateral and medial flanges. Medially at the
posterior end, is a large tuberous growth that likely indicates
pathology.

[\[BextremusQuadrate\]]{#BextremusQuadrate label="BextremusQuadrate"}

Specimen CAMSM X39251ab and X39251aq preserves a complete right quadrate
and the ventral portion of the left quadrate respectively
([\[tbl:Bextremus-skull-measurements,pl27\]](#tbl:Bextremus-skull-measurements,pl27){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:Bextremus-skull-measurements,pl27"}, figs 5--7). The form
of this element is largely indistinguishable from certain examples of
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, forming the characteristic
[C]{.sans-serif}-shape. The pterygoid lamella is a slightly roughened
plane of bone to which the supratemporal dorsally, and the pterygoid
ventrally, would have been applied. Central on this face, a small
excavation marks the facet for the stapes, although it is poorly defined
in this specimen. The dorsal and medial margins of the quadrate are
emarginated and would have been continued in cartilage. At the ventral
part of the medial margin, the quadrate forms a heel, as the margin is
deflected laterally towards the articular condyle. The internal surface
is convex dorsoventrally and laterally, and smooth, forming part of the
posterior wall of the adductor chamber. The lateral margin is
emarginated, with the dorsal portion drawn slightly anteriorly; the
quadratojugal would have articulated across this emargination. The
ventral articular boss is rather worn, but also seems to have two
articular facets, as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*: an anterolateral
facet for the glenoid fossa of the surangular, and a posterolateral
facet for the articular. Both of these are irregularly pitted,
indicating the presence of cartilage in life.

![*Brachypterygius extremus* [Boulenger, -@Boulenger1904]: basioccipital
(CAMSM J68516) in posterior (**a**) and left lateral (**b**) views and
basisphenoid in ventral view (**c**) . Abbreviations: **ac**, articular
condyle; **btp**, basipterygoid process; **icf**, internal carotid
foramen; **eca**, extracondylar area; **fex**, exoccipital facet on the
basioccipital; **fm**, foramen magnum; **fop**, opisthotic facet on the
basioccipital; **fpt**, pterygoidal facet on the basisphenoid; **fst**,
stapedial facet on the basioccipital; **gr**, groove for transmission of
the palatine ramus of the facial (VII) nerve; **no**, notochordal pit;
**par**, base of parasphenoid. Scale bar represents 100 mm.
[\[fig:Bextremus-basicranium\]]{#fig:Bextremus-basicranium
label="fig:Bextremus-basicranium"}](./img/fig-Bextremus-basiscranii.png "fig:"){#fig:Bextremus-basicranium}
[\[fig:Bextremus-bocpos\]]{#fig:Bextremus-bocpos
label="fig:Bextremus-bocpos"}
[\[fig:Bextremus-boclat\]]{#fig:Bextremus-boclat
label="fig:Bextremus-boclat"}
[\[fig:Bextremus-bspven\]]{#fig:Bextremus-bspven
label="fig:Bextremus-bspven"}

[\[BextremusParabasisphenoid\]]{#BextremusParabasisphenoid
label="BextremusParabasisphenoid"}

The parabasisphenoid of *Brachypterygius extremus* is not known
completely: the parasphenoid is co-ossified with the base of the
basisphenoid, as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, but is frequently broken
off and lost
([\[fig:Bextremus-bspven,pl28\]](#fig:Bextremus-bspven,pl28){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-bspven,pl28"}, figs 1--4,
[\[pl29\]](#pl29){reference-type="ref" reference="pl29"}, figs 1--4).
This description will, therefore, focus on the basisphenoid (posterior)
portion. Although broadly similar in form to that of *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, there are key diagnostic differences between the two taxa.

The anterior face of the basisphenoid is trapezoidal as in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. Many of the anterior features seen in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* are not as clear in *Brachypterygius
extremus*, particularly the development of the *dorsum sellae* and the
anterior articulations of the trabecular cartilages, but this may be an
effect of preservation. Between the facets for the trabecular cartilage,
the pituitary fossa is much reduced in *Brachypterygius extremus*
compared to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. There are no foramina located
lateral to this in *Brachypterygius extremus* either. The ventral
portion of the anterior face is strongly swollen medially, as the
posterior part of the parasphenoid is more robust and deeper than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. In dorsal view, the anterior face is not as
clearly visible as it is in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, and the dorsal
articulations for the stapes and basioccipital appear to extend to the
anterior edge of the basisphenoid. In this view, and particularly in
ventral view, the basipterygoid processes can be seen, and are clearly
more substantial and wing-like than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The
posterior dorsal surface is dominated by the heavily pitted facets for
stapes and basioccipital, with cartilaginous intervention. A
dorsoventral groove is also present, as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.
The ventral view shows the differences from the basisphenoid of
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* most clearly. The basipterygoid processes are
clearly separated from the main body of the basisphenoid and noticeably
angled anteriorly. Distally, they are somewhat anteroposteriorly shorter
and more rounded than the broad, square processes in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, but would have been covered in cartilage. Posteriorly, the
basipterygoid processes are bordered by a deep groove that @Kirton1983
suggested transmitted the palatine nerve. Ventrally, the single internal
carotid foramen is placed further posteriorly in *Brachypterygius
extremus* than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, to meet the posterior
portion of the parasphenoid at its posteriormost point, rather than
surrounding it laterally. The suture between parasphenoid and
basisphenoid ventrally is clearly visible in CAMSM X39251ae, and the
parasphenoid does not contact the internal carotid foramen. However, in
CAMSM TN 571.11 (= J68516), the parasphenoid may form a small shelf
ventral to the internal carotid foramen. The posterior margin of the
basisphenoid in *Brachypterygius extremus* is angled laterally around
the basioccipital and stapedial facets so that the whole element has a
more pentagonal shape in ventral view than in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*.

[\[BextremusProotic\]]{#BextremusProotic label="BextremusProotic"}

A partially preserved prootic is present in CAMSM X39251ce
([\[pl29\]](#pl29){reference-type="ref" reference="pl29"}, figs 5, 6);
which side of the skull it originates from cannot be determined
certainly, but it is tentatively treated as a right prootic based on the
criteria outlined by @Kirton1983. The external (anterior) surface is
heavily worn, and only the lateral and medial margins remain. In
internal (posterior) view, there are smooth-floored impressions of the
membranous labyrinth in the middle of the prootic, forming a
[V]{.sans-serif}-shape that swells medially and ventrally. The medial
portion of these impressions has a further depression medially, and
there is a smaller pit ventrally; these may indicate the positions of
the sacculus and utriculus respectively (see
[\[OicenicusProotic\]](#OicenicusProotic){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusProotic"}). The margins of the posterior prootic are
rounded and roughened for the cartilage that surrounded the otic
capsule.

[\[BextremusOpisthotic\]]{#BextremusOpisthotic
label="BextremusOpisthotic"}

Both opisthotics are present in CAMSM X39251ap (left) and X39251as
(right), but the right opisthotic is the best preserved
([\[pl29\]](#pl29){reference-type="ref" reference="pl29"}, figs 7--12).
The massive medial body is squared in anterior and posterior views, with
a short, robust paroccipital process that extends dorsolaterally. The
anterior surface is smooth and concave laterally along the paroccipital
process, but medially is ridged to separate from a large anteroventrally
facing facet, which articulates with the dorsal stapes. Dorsal to the
ridge is a narrow groove that traverses dorsolaterally towards the
paroccipital process. The dorsal surface of the opisthotic is smooth and
concave, but rounded convexly towards the posterior surface. Medially,
the opisthotic has two main parts: the more anterodorsal portion faces
medially and shows the [V]{.sans-serif}- or [T]{.sans-serif}-shaped
impressions of the membranous labyrinth. This is surrounded by a narrow
articular surface on most sides, apart from posteroventrally, where
there is a larger articulation as the opisthotic meets the exoccipital
medially. The ventral surface is roughened for articulation with the
basioccipital and the stapes ventrally. The basioccipital portion is
represented anteromedially by a slight upturning of the facet, while the
major part is given to the stapedial facet posteriorly. The stapedial
facet is divided by a posteriorly-positioned, laterally directed groove.

[\[BextremusSupraoccipital\]]{#BextremusSupraoccipital
label="BextremusSupraoccipital"}

The supraoccipital is preserved in CAMSM X39251bt and forms a squared
arch in anterior and posterior views
([\[pl30\]](#pl30){reference-type="ref" reference="pl30"}, figs 1--4).
The dorsal margin of the supraoccipital is thickened and grooved as it
was continued anterodorsally by cartilage. In dorsal and ventral views,
the supraoccipital has a [C]{.sans-serif}-shape: laterally the
supraoccipital is continued anteriorly by two large processes. On the
anterolateral surfaces of these processes, there are
[T]{.sans-serif}-shaped impressions that mark the passage of the
membranous labyrinth anteriorly. Dorsal to these impressions, the
supraoccipital broadens to meet the dorsal margin, but there is a
shallow groove that separates the more anterior section dorsal to the
otic capsule. The internal face of the supraoccipital is smooth and is
pierced on the lateral surfaces by two foramen that traverse to near the
lateral margins of external posterior surface. The posterior surface is
smooth in its ventral portion, and separated from the anterolateral otic
surface by a rounded, thickened ridge ventrolaterally. Two small
concavities are present on the ventrolateral part of the posterior
surface, and lace posterolaterally. The dorsal portion of the posterior
surface is roughened and raised dorsal to the lateral surfaces by a
broad ridge, which traverses dorsolaterally. The supraoccipital portion
of the *foramen magnum* is large, over one-half of the height of the
supraoccipital, and is squared dorsally. There is no median ventral
process on the roof of the *foramen magnum*, as in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*. There is a ventral constriction of the supraoccipital portion
of the *foramen magnum* between the ventral exoccipital articulations
laterally, but this is not as strong as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.
Ventrally, there are two small, triangular facets that articulate with
the dorsal exoccipitals. These facets are concave and broadest
posteriorly, and the points of the facets are aligned subparallel
towards the anterior.

[\[BextremusExoccipital\]]{#BextremusExoccipital
label="BextremusExoccipital"}

The exoccipitals are essentially identical in both *Brachypterygius
extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. They form a short column
between the basioccipital ventrally and the supraoccipital dorsally,
enclosing the *foramen magnum*
([\[tbl:Bextremus-skull-measurements\]](#tbl:Bextremus-skull-measurements){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:Bextremus-skull-measurements"}). The anterior face is
largely smooth, but pierced by a large foramen medially. Dorsally, the
surface is pitted for the application of cartilage and slopes ventrally,
posterolaterally forming a ridge that encloses part of the vagus
foramen, completed laterally by the opisthotic. The ventral surface is
drawn out anteriorly into a long, broadly triangular, tapering tongue.
This surface is also pitted for cartilage and is convex to fit the
concave exoccipital facets of the basioccipital (see
[\[BextremusBasioccipital\]](#BextremusBasioccipital){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusBasioccipital"}). In *Brachypterygius extremus*,
there are three foramina on the anterolateral face, compared to two in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. @Maisch1997a has described exoccipitals from
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* with three lateral foramina, so this feature
may be variable (see
[\[OicenicusExoccipital\]](#OicenicusExoccipital){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusExoccipital"}).

[\[BextremusBasioccipital\]]{#BextremusBasioccipital
label="BextremusBasioccipital"}

The basioccipital of *Brachypterygius extremus* is also different from
that of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[fig:Bextremus-bocpos,fig:Bextremus-boclat,tbl:Bextremus-basioccipital-measurements,pl28\]](#fig:Bextremus-bocpos,fig:Bextremus-boclat,tbl:Bextremus-basioccipital-measurements,pl28){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-bocpos,fig:Bextremus-boclat,tbl:Bextremus-basioccipital-measurements,pl28"},
figs 5--8). It forms the entirety of the articulation with the vertebral
column as a hemispherical boss, but anteriorly is not as broad. The
anterior face is subpentagonal and heavily pitted for the cartilage that
intervened between this face and the posterodorsal face of the
basisphenoid; the corresponding median groove is also present. This
groove traverses the entire anterior face of the basioccipital in
*Brachypterygius extremus*, precluding the presence of a basioccipital
peg, or the rudiments thereof. There are no specimens that show the
smoothing associated with the structures of the otic capsule that is
found in some specimens of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. Dorsally, the
basioccipital has two lateral concavities into which the ventral face of
the exoccipitals fit, with cartilage intervening. Between these, the
grooved, smooth-based ridge forms the floor of the *foramen magnum*, not
raised as high as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The exoccipital facets
are more triangular in shape than in some specimens of *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*. This may be a result of variable ossification, or indicate
that the exoccipital may have been applied more closely to the
basioccipital in *Brachypterygius extremus*.

llSSSS Specimen & & Width &\
(lr)4-6 & & & Left & Right & Proportion of total width (%)\
CAMSM & J68516b & 102.9 & 10.4 & 7.75 & 17.60\
NHMUK & 45905 & 72.7 & 3.2 & 3.55 & 9.30\
& 45984 & 93.55 & 6.9 & 10.3 & 18.40\
OUMNH & J68543 & 82 & 6.2 & 7.4 & 16.60\
& J1627 & 113 & 9.2 & 7.2 & 14.50\

\

Much of the lateral surface of the basioccipital is taken up by facets
for the opisthotic, dorsally, and stapes, ventrally. The opisthotic
facet is poorly defined, not as obvious as in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, but takes the form of a broad pitted boss on the dorsal
anterolateral part of the basioccipital. Ventral to this, the stapedial
facet is separated from the opisthotic facet by a low, obliquely-angled
ridge. The oval stapedial facet itself seems to be concave, as it is
formed of two contacts, separated by a median ridge, anterior to a
strong dorsoventral ridge. This last ridge separates the stapedial facet
from the extracondylar area posteriorly. The extracondylar area in
*Brachypterygius extremus* is much narrower than in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, forming only a limited dorsoventral strip around the anterior
of the condylar articulation. The resulting difference in form between
*Brachypterygius extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* is most
clearly seen in posterior view: the extracondylar area is barely visible
in the former, compared to the broad concavities that are seen in the
latter. Ventrally, the basioccipital of *Brachypterygius extremus* is
not developed into large tubera, confluent with the extracondylar area,
as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. Together, these differences give the
basioccipital of *Brachypterygius extremus* a smaller, more rectangular
appearance than that of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The basioccipital
condyle in *Brachypterygius extremus* is not as clearly separated from
the extracondylar area. This surface is rugose for the application of
the articular cartilage. A small notochordal pit is placed dorsally on
the condyle, more dorsally than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, and may
be dorsoventrally elongate.

[\[BextremusStapes\]]{#BextremusStapes label="BextremusStapes"}

A poorly preserved stapes is associated with the right pterygoid in
CAMSM X39251bh ([\[pl27\]](#pl27){reference-type="ref"
reference="pl27"}, fig. 3). It appears similar to the stapes in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, with a massive medial boss and more slender
lateral shaft, but is smaller, relative to the size of the pterygoid. No
other examples of the stapes in *Brachypterygius extremus* are known.

[\[BextremusDentary\]]{#BextremusDentary label="BextremusDentary"}

The dentary extends along much of the lower jaw, as in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, and, like the premaxilla (see
[\[BextremusPremaxilla\]](#BextremusPremaxilla){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusPremaxilla"}), is somewhat more robust in
*Brachypterygius extremus* (). Its posterior extent is uncertain,
although it is likely to have extended to a similar position as in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*: approximately ventral to the orbital
midpoint. The anterior tip of the dentary is rounded, like the
premaxilla and unlike the tapering anterior tip found in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*; the nature of the symphysis is uncertain.
McGowan's [-@McGowan1976] jaw depth ratio is 46.1 mm/810 mm = 0.569 for
BRSMG Ce 16696, 77 mm/1230 mm =0.626 in CAMSM J68516 (compared to 0.72
in [@McGowan1976]), and 0.47 in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
[@Kirton1983]. For much of the preorbital length of the dentary, a
longitudinal groove is present, discontinuous anteriorly, leading to
several foramina that are directed internally, as is the case in the
premaxilla and also in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The posterior portion
of this groove widens dorsoventrally into a more distinct channel that
shallows towards the posterior dentary. This is unlike *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* in which the groove tends to taper posteriorly. Ventrally, the
dentary meets the splenial, excluding the splenial from lateral exposure
ventrally for about the anterior one-third of the lower jaw. Posterior
to this, the angulars intervene between the dentary and splenial,
excluding the latter from lateral view. The posterior portion of the
dentary tapers dorsally, exposing the main body of the surangular
ventrally. The alveolar groove is present along much of the length of
the dentary. In BRSMG Ce 16696, the dentary holds at least 36 teeth,
while in CAMSM J68516, there are about 51 teeth in the dentary.

[\[BextremusSplenial\]]{#BextremusSplenial label="BextremusSplenial"}

A small part of the splenials is exposed ventrally in BRSMG Ce 16696 and
fragments are preserved in CAMSM X39251
([\[fig:Bextremus-BRSMG,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull\]](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull"}). These are
too poorly exposed or preserved for description, but they appear to be
similar to those of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The ventral margin of
the splenial is well rounded where it takes part in the ventral margin
of the mandible and the lateral face has a low ridge into which the
ventromesial portion of the angular fits.

[\[BextremusSurangular\]]{#BextremusSurangular
label="BextremusSurangular"}

The surangular has a moderate exposure in the lateral mandible; its
contact with the dentary is oblique and long dorsally, and it is covered
extensively by the angular ventrally (). Both surangulars are well
preserved in CAMSM X39251y, X39251aa, X39251ak, and X39251cf
([\[pl31\]](#pl31){reference-type="ref" reference="pl31"}, figs 1--8).
The anterior ramus of the surangular is narrow at the anterior end where
it is covered laterally by the dentary and medially by the splenial, but
becomes dorsoventrally higher posteriorly, forming a vertical sheet. The
articulation with the dentary is marked laterally by a
posteroventrally-directed ridge dorsal to the Meckelian canal in the
middle of the surangular. Dorsally, the margin of the surangular is
rounded and the lateral surface just ventral to this margin is smooth.
At about the midpoint of the surangular, there is a low rise in the
dorsal margin. In its posterior region, the surangular becomes broader,
and a second ridge traverses from the middle of the lateral surface
posterodorsally towards the posterior end. The medial surface is concave
dorsoventrally. Anteriorly, there is a longitudinal ridge along the
midline that may mark the articulation with the splenial medially.
Posterior to this ridge, the surangular is less well-preserved, but has
a series of longitudinal ridges posteriorly. The posterior ends of the
surangular are present, and similar to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The
dorsal margin is raised into a long process, the paracoronoid process,
anterior to a dorsally-facing, bowl-like concavity. Medially, there is a
large, dorsomedially-deflected process for attachment of the
*M. adductor mandibulae externus* group, which is anterior to another
anteroposterior concavity that marks the jaw glenoid articulation. The
posterolateral surface of the surangular is rounded posteriorly and
roughened, while the medial surface is rougher still for articulation
with the articular.

[\[BextremusAngular\]]{#BextremusAngular label="BextremusAngular"}

The angular has significant exposure along the posterior mandible in
BRSMG Ce 16696, greater than the surangular exposure, but unlike in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, although this may be a result of crushing of
the skull (; [\[pl30\]](#pl30){reference-type="ref" reference="pl30"},
figs 5, 6). The posterior angular curves gently dorsally, and the
external surface is convex, meeting the splenial ventrally. The angular
inserts between the dentary and the splenial, and is covered internally
by the latter. The partial left angular in CAMSM X39251 is rod-like
anteriorly, with a convex, rounded, triangular ventral margin, and two
longitudinal grooves dorsally. These hold the ventral surangular
(lateral groove) and the form the floor of the Meckelian canal (medial
groove) respectively. The grooves are separated by a sharp ridge that
migrates posterolaterally, and becomes less distinct. Towards the
posterior of the mandible, the angular gradually becomes higher,
bordering the surangular dorsally. The grooves end abruptly at this
dorsal deflection of the dorsal angular surface. The posterior angular
fans over the surface of the mandible, ventral to the jaw articulation,
and is covered by radiating striations, likely marking the attachment of
cartilage. This cartilage would continue posterior to the articulation
forming a short retroarticular process.

[\[BextremusPrearticular\]]{#BextremusPrearticular
label="BextremusPrearticular"}

Specimen CAMSM X39251cb is interpreted as the posterior portion of the
prearticular ([\[pl31\]](#pl31){reference-type="ref" reference="pl31"},
figs 9, 10). The prearticular is a thin vertical sheet that articulates
between the surangular laterally and the splenial medially in its
anterior region, but is medially exposed in its posterior portion.
Laterally, the prearticular is flat, with a roughened surface for
articulation. The middle portion of specimen CAMSM X39251cb is raised
into a high, rounded, sheet-like process, which is interpreted as
ventral to the paracoronoid process based on comparison with
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* (see
[\[OicenicusPrearticular,fig:Oicenicus-jaw\]](#OicenicusPrearticular,fig:Oicenicus-jaw){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusPrearticular,fig:Oicenicus-jaw"}). The medial
surface of the anterior part of this specimen is smooth and slightly
convex dorsoventrally. Posteriorly, the prearticular is deflected
medially as the dorsal process descends, as well as the posteriormost
portion of the specimen; the dorsal margin is grooved medially posterior
to the process. Ventrally, a groove ascends on the lateral surface of
the prearticular to the posterior end of the preserved portion; the
surface ventral to this is roughened.

[\[BextremusArticular\]]{#BextremusArticular label="BextremusArticular"}

A few specimens of articulars have been referred to *Brachypterygius
extremus* (or its synonyms). Only the articular with CAMSM X39251ar is
certainly from this taxon ([\[pl30\]](#pl30){reference-type="ref"
reference="pl30"}, figs 6, 7), but others (e.g.  NHMUK PV 45986) are
also likely referable to *Brachypterygius extremus*. The articular is
small and rounded, as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, but can be more
extensive dorsolaterally, as in NHMUK PV 45986 and apparently BRSMG Ce
16696. Its anterior surface is dominated by the dorsal facet for the
articular condyle of the quadrate (see
[\[BextremusQuadrate\]](#BextremusQuadrate){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusQuadrate"}), a large, oval, rugose area directed
anteriorly and slightly dorsally. Ventral to this, there may be another
smaller facet developed in CAMSM X39251ar directed anteroventrally to
articulate with possibly the angular or prearticular; this facet is not
found in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. However, this may also be a
constriction between the articular facet dorsally and angular facet
ventrally. The angular facet is placed in the middle of the ventral
margin of the articular, which is slightly drawn out ventrally as a
shallow concavity. Medially, the surface of the articular is shaped like
a shallow saddle, weakly concave anteroposteriorly, but strongly convex
dorsoventrally. Posterior to the anterior articular facet, a slightly
roughened, rounded ridge descends ventrally towards the main body. The
posterior portion of the articular is rounded and roughened, suggesting
a cartilaginous covering. Laterally, the surface is planar, but strongly
ridged and grooved longitudinally, likely complementary to the medial
surface of the surangular, to form a strong contact to the jaw.

[\[BextremusDentition\]]{#BextremusDentition label="BextremusDentition"}

The teeth of *Brachypterygius extremus* are similar in form to those of
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, but noticeably larger relative to the jaw
size
([\[fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull,pl32\]](#fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull,pl32){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull,pl32"},
figs 1--9). Unlike *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, teeth have been found
with all substantial jaw remains of *Brachypterygius extremus*, which
allows for more accurate tooth counts. Specimen BRSMG Ce 16696 preserves
50 teeth in each upper jaw, of which 23 are in each maxilla, and at
least 35 in each lower jaw; specimen CAMSM J68516 has 53 teeth in each
upper jaw, 23 in each maxilla, and slightly more than 51 in each lower
jaw; numerous disarticulated teeth are preserved with CAMSM X39251.
These values are comparable to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* (see
[\[OicenicusDentition\]](#OicenicusDentition){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusDentition"}), in which there are around 50 teeth in
each jaw, with 23 in the maxilla also.

The largest teeth are towards the middle of the jaw, as in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*: the largest exposed tooth in CAMSM J68516 is
over 47 mm high apicobasally ([@Kirton1983]: 53.4 mm), with a 24.2 mm
high crown, but missing the tooth root; incomplete teeth in CAMSM X39251
are 69.45 mm and 72.30 mm in apicobasal length. Tooth size decreases
towards the anterior and posterior ends of the alveolar groove, but not
to the extent seen in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. This continuously
robust dentition may be one cause for the lack of anterior tapering of
the premaxillae and dentaries, and the rounded snout otherwise seen in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. McGowan's [-@McGowan1976]) tooth index (10 ×
crown height of largest tooth/jaw length) is 16.2 mm/810 mm = 0.200 for
BRSMG Ce 16696, and 24.2 mm/1230 mm = 0.197 for CAMSM J68516. This value
is the same as found by @Kirton1983, but much lower than the 0.37 of
@McGowan1976. The alveolar groove is not well exposed in the two
specimens above, but fragments of the jaw in CAMSM X39251 have the low
partial septa forming impressions where the teeth would sit (aulacodont
dentition of [@Mazin1983] and [@Motani1997a]).

Each tooth is curved slightly lingually, but not to the same extent as
in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The tooth crowns are conical,
longitudinally striated, and comprise about one-third of the tooth
height with a well-defined enamel base. Immediately basal to the tooth
crown, the root is smooth. The tooth bases of most larger teeth are
bulbous, sub-quadrangular, and smooth. A resorption pit is present
lingually on the base of the tooth where developing teeth would lie
before erupting. In smaller teeth, such as CAMSM X39251c, the crown
comprises a larger portion of the tooth height, the root is also more
bulbous and rounded, with no apparent root ornamentation basally, or
resorption pit lingually. This specimen likely represents a posterior
maxillary tooth.

[\[BextremusVertebrae\]]{#BextremusVertebrae label="BextremusVertebrae"}

Vertebrae are preserved disarticulated and out of sequence in CAMSM
J68516, so that it is difficult to be sure of trends along the vertebral
column. Several vertebrae are found *in situ* in BRSMG Ce 16696, but
these have not been prepared completely, which prevents a detailed
description. @Kirton1983 noted that the vertebrae are relatively larger
in *Brachypterygius extremus* than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*: 90.5
mm high (CAMSM J68516) compared to 75.3 mm (NHMUK PV R4753). They are
amphicoelous and take the typical ichthyosaurian form of short discs.
However, rather than the near-circular cross section found in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, in *Brachypterygius extremus* the ventral
margins of the anterior to middle presacral centra appear to be slightly
parabolic in anterior and posterior view. Dorsally, the base of the
neural canal is a roughened, square area that sits between the two
raised pedestals of the neural arch facets laterally. These are slightly
concave to receive the pedicels of the neural arches. Laterally, the
surfaces of the centra are anteroposteriorly concave and pierced by
nutritive foramina: less frequent and larger than in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*. The rib facets are separated into diapophysis and
parapophysis in many of the vertebral centra; the same divisions are
used as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* (see
[\[OicenicusVertebralcolumn\]](#OicenicusVertebralcolumn){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusVertebralcolumn"}). In one centrum where the
diapophysis is closest to the neural arch facet, but clearly separate,
the rib facet is entirely detached from the anterior margin of the
centrum. In *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, these would be connected by a
thin, poorly ossified, cartilaginous ridge. Those centra with single rib
facets, interpreted as belonging to the caudal region, are similar to
those of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, but are not as strongly square
ventrally, retaining a slight curve. Ventral thickening for articulation
with haemal arches could not be confirmed.

Five anterior neural spines are preserved, but poorly exposed, in left
lateral view in BRSMG Ce 16696, possibly on the anteriormost five
vertebrae ([1.30](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull"}). These increase greatly in
height posteriorly, approximately doubling in height from first to last;
the last is a little higher than its centrum, although the outlines
cannot be seen clearly. The lower part appears to form a short pedestal,
presumably creating the neural arch, slightly anteriorly-directed and
articulating with the posterior portion of the preceding neural arch at
about one-third of its height. Dorsally, the neural spine is directed
posterodorsally and broadens anteroposteriorly. Distally, the neural
spine articulates with the anterior and posterior spines.

[\[BextremusRibs\]]{#BextremusRibs label="BextremusRibs"}

Fragments of ribs are preserved in specimen CAMSM X39251, but are poorly
exposed in BRSMG Ce 16696
([\[fig:Bextremus-BRSMG,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body\]](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body"}). These appear
similar to those of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, but the distal shape is
unknown. Proximal fragments, and facets on the vertebral centra, show
bicipital articulations with the centra along at least some of the axial
skeleton, probably becoming unicipital in the caudal series.

![*Brachypterygius extremus* [Boulenger, -@Boulenger1904]: body portion
in left lateral view (**a**) (BRSMG Ce 16696) and interpretation
(**b**). Although preserved, the posterior of this specimen has yet to
be prepared. Abbreviations: **c**, coracoid; **j**, jugal; **h**,
humerus; **ns**, neural spine; **po**, postorbital; **r**, rib; **s**,
scapula; **sc**, sclerotic plate; **sp**, splenial; **v**, vertebral
centrum. Scale bar represents 200 mm. Photograph courtesy Simon Powell,
used with permission.
[\[fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body\]]{#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body
label="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body"}](./img/fig-Bextremus-BRSMG-body.png){#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body}

[\[BextremusClavicle\]]{#BextremusClavicle label="BextremusClavicle"}

The clavicles are preserved in CAMSM X39251ag and X39251aj
([\[pl32\]](#pl32){reference-type="ref" reference="pl32"}, figs 10--13).
These are elongate and curved dorsolaterally towards the distal ends.
They are not as robust as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The external
(anterior) surface is convex dorsoventrally. The medial margins of both
clavicles are incomplete, so the nature of the articulation between the
two is uncertain. The medial portion is oriented transversely, but at
about one-half of its length laterally, the clavicle is deflected
dorsolaterally, creating a heel on the posterior margin; distally, the
clavicle tapers to a point. Posteriorly, the clavicle is grooved
medially to receive the anterior interclavicle. The groove is more
distinct just lateral to the medial clavicle, and becomes shallower
distally. Ventral to this groove, the margin of the clavicle is drawn
posterior to hold the interclavicle, but not to the same extent as in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The posterior surface of the distal clavicle
is roughened. The distalmost tips of two clavicles are poorly preserved.

[\[BextremusScapula\]]{#BextremusScapula label="BextremusScapula"}

Separate proximal and distal regions of the scapula are partially
exposed in BRSMG Ce 16696, and a proximal right scapular fragment and
nearly complete left scapula are present in CAMSM X39251
([\[fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,pl32\]](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,pl32){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,pl32"}, figs 14, 15). The form of
the scapula is similar to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, with a ventrally
expanded proximal portion and a narrower, strap-like distal portion. The
proximal articular margin is pitted, like in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*,
but is not as strongly curved in *Brachypterygius extremus* as in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, forming a less strong [S]{.sans-serif}-shape
proximally, although the lateral surface is strongly concave. The
borders of facets are difficult to determine in CAMSM X39251, but it is
likely that there are two main articulations, dorsally and ventrally,
for the glenoid and coracoid respectively. A groove along the proximal
margin suggests cartilage was present. Posteroventrally, the scapula is
expanded laterally into the teardrop-shaped coracoid articulation. The
dorsal margin of the scapula is raised proximally to form a concave area
between the dorsal margin and the coracoid facet ventrally. In CAMSM
X39251, this is not well developed and, although there is evidence of an
distinct acromion process, this is not as large as in some specimens of
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, and is not offset from the main body of the
scapula. Distally, the scapula forms a thin, wide shaft that is curved
medially and broadens distally. The ventral margin of the scapula is
strongly concave while the dorsal margin is nearly straight, only
becoming slightly concave proximally. Medially, the proximal scapula is
concave between the raised dorsal margin and ventrally expanded portion
posterior to the coracoid articulation; this concavity extends along
one-half of the scapular length in CAMSM X39251 as the marginal ridges
reduce posteriorly.

[\[BextremusCoracoid\]]{#BextremusCoracoid label="BextremusCoracoid"}

Two incomplete coracoids are present in CAMSM J68516 and a (right?)
coracoid is exposed in ventral view in BRSMG Ce 16996
([1.32](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body"}). The coracoids appear to be
relatively longer and narrower in *Brachypterygius extremus* than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. A single anterior notch is present
laterally. The coracoids are saddle-shaped, with the lateral margins
raised to accommodate the lateral articular surfaces. The lateral facet
does not seem as large as the medial facet. From CAMSM J68516, the
coracoids appear more equant than in BRSMG Ce 16696, likely following
posterior breakage in the former specimen. The posterior border in BRSMG
Ce 16696 is partially exposed and is straight, separated from the
lateral facet by an obtuse angle. This is quite different from regularly
rounded posterior margins seen in the coracoids of *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*.

[\[BextremusHumerus\]]{#BextremusHumerus label="BextremusHumerus"}

Several humeri are referable to *Brachypterygius extremus*, including
the holotype (NHMUK PV R3177), a probable counterpart (WESTM 1978.219),
and BRSMG Ce 16696, which allows establishment of the synonymy of
*Brachypterygius extremus* and *Grendelius mordax* (see
[\[BextremusDiscussion,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,fig:Bextremus-forelimb,tbl:Bextremus-humeral-measurements,tbl:Bextremus-humfacet-measurements,pl33\]](#BextremusDiscussion,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,fig:Bextremus-forelimb,tbl:Bextremus-humeral-measurements,tbl:Bextremus-humfacet-measurements,pl33){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusDiscussion,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,fig:Bextremus-forelimb,tbl:Bextremus-humeral-measurements,tbl:Bextremus-humfacet-measurements,pl33"}).
The holotype is crushed and broken proximally, and BRSMG Ce 16696 is
only visible in ventral view, but WESTM 1978.219 is largely complete,
although it has some minor crushing, and can be taken out of its mount
and viewed from all angles.

lllSSSSS Specimen & & L/R & Proximodistal length & &\
(lr)5-6(lr)7-8 & & & & Proximal & Distal & Proximal & Distal\
CAMSM & J29864 & L & 123.4 & & & 90 & 50.7\
& J67556 & R & 124 & 85.1 & 95 & 91.2 & 45.2\
NHMUK PV & 42284 & R & 157 & & 125.4 & & 52.25\
& 42286 & L & 127.7 & & 103.1 & & 53.6\
OUMNH & J1585 & L & 159 & & 111 & & 50.8\
& J1586 & R & 148 & & 105.8 & &\
& J1608 & L & 132.9 & & & &\
WESTM & 1978.219 & L & 142.2 & 89.4 & 110.9 & &\

\

![*Brachypterygius extremus* [Boulenger, -@Boulenger1904]: right
forelimbs NHMUK PV R3177 (**a**) and CAMSM J29864 (**b**) in dorsal
view. Abbreviations: **dp**, dorsal process; **h**, humerus; **i**,
intermedium; **po**, post axial accessory element; **pr**, pre-axial
accessory element; **r**, radius; **rd**, radiale; **u**, ulna; **ul**,
ulnare; **Arabic numerals**, distal carpals; **roman numerals**,
metacarpals. Scale bar represents 100 mm.
[\[fig:Bextremus-forelimb\]]{#fig:Bextremus-forelimb
label="fig:Bextremus-forelimb"}](./img/fig-Bextremus-forelimb.png){#fig:Bextremus-forelimb
width="\\textwidth"}

The humerus broadly takes a similar form to that of *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, but with some differences that are of taxonomic importance.
It is a short, robust element with a large and rounded proximal head,
constricted diaphysis, and greatly expands anteroposteriorly towards the
distal end to accommodate three distal humeral facets. The proximal
surface is gently convex and heavily pitted for a large amount of
cartilage that would intervene between this and the glenoid formed by
the scapula and coracoid (see
[\[BextremusScapula,BextremusCoracoid\]](#BextremusScapula,BextremusCoracoid){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusScapula,BextremusCoracoid"}). As in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, the proximal surface is broadened dorsoventrally by the
development of large dorsal and ventral processes, to which strong
muscles would have attached. The uncrushed specimen CAMSM J67556 shows
that the angle across these processes is slightly less than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, about 30° relative to the anteroposterior
axis, as the ventral deltopectoral crest is not as anteriorly developed
in *Brachypterygius extremus* as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The
dorsal process is strongly developed into a high, plate-like ridge that
extends distally and slightly anteriorly from the proximal surface of
the humerus for about one-half of the humeral length. It is confluent
with the proximal surface of the humerus and much of the dorsal margin
of this ridge is also pitted, but not as much as the proximal articular
surface, becoming smoother distally and descending to the main body of
the humerus. In specimen CAMSM J67556, the proximal margin of the dorsal
ridge is slightly excavated into a low channel. This process is
surrounded by large concavities anteriorly and posteriorly. The
deltopectoral crest is not as well demarcated as the dorsal process,
forming a large triangular expansion proximally, with an anteriorly
placed proximodistal ridge. This ridge decreases in prominence distally,
extending for about one-half of the humeral length. These dorsal and
ventral expansions give the humerus a triangular cross section
proximally, and a broad surface in anterior view. As in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, this causes the anterior edge of the diaphysis to be more
round than the posterior edge, aiding in orientating specimens.

Distally, the humerus expands anteroposteriorly to at least the width of
the proximal portion, usually slightly greater. The anterior part is
drawn anteriorly slightly relative to the posterior part, leading to a
slight asymmetry across the middle facet and the long axis of the
humerus in dorsal view. This is well shown in NHMUK PV R3177 and WESTM
1978.219, and results in a more acute angle at the anterodistal
extremity than at the posterodistal. In cross section, the distal shape
contrasts with that of the diaphysis: anteriorly pointed and posteriorly
round, which is the case in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The distal face
is divided into three facets by low ridges, which articulate with
(anterior to posterior) the radius, intermedium (the smallest), and
ulna. Between each facet, a large obtuse angle is visible in dorsal or
ventral view, so that the radial, intermedial, and ulnar facets are
directed anterodistally, distally, and posterodistally respectively. The
radial and ulnar facets are approximately the same size, but anterior
extension of the distal humerus can make the radial facet larger. In
specimen WESTM 1978.2 19, the humerus is drawn anteriorly enough that it
may have articulated with the proximal part of the anterior accessory
element: a poorly-developed potential facet is present. The distal
margin of the radial facet may also be concave. Between these, the
intermedial facet is smaller, and allows a clear distinction between
this taxon and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*: in the latter, the anterior
facet is the smallest, and the middle facet is the largest. Compared to
the holotype (NHMUK PV R3177), specimen CAMSM J29864 has a narrower
intermedial facet. @Kirton1983 attributed this feature to more advanced
ossification in the holotype, however, this is unlikely as both
specimens are large and well ossified. The surface of these distal
facets is concave to accept the epipodials and intermedium, and slightly
rugose, indicating that cartilage intervened between the facets and more
distal elements.

lllSSS Specimen & & L/R &\
(lr)4-6 & & & Radial & Intermedial & Ulnar\
CAMSM & J67556 & R & 38.4 & 18.3 & 39.5\
NHMUK PV & 42284 & R & 157 & 17.2 & 56.7\
& 42286 & L & 50.6 & 11.7 & 41.9\
OUMNH & J1585 & L & 159 & 21.85 & 46.3\
WESTM & 1978.219 & L & 142.2 & 19.5 & 40.95\

\

[\[BextremusEpipodials\]]{#BextremusEpipodials
label="BextremusEpipodials"} The radius and ulna articulate with the
anterior and posterior distal facets of the humerus (see
[\[BextremusHumerus,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33\]](#BextremusHumerus,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusHumerus,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33"},
fig. 4). They are of similar size, although the ulna is consistently
slightly larger than the radius in the specimens examined. The radius
and ulna are both subquadrate, thickened elements, becoming thicker
towards the midline of the forelimb. The dorsal and ventral surfaces are
roughened, while the other surfaces are deeply and irregularly pitted
where the articular cartilage would have been applied. Both the radius
and ulna usually articulate distally with three elements each. The
radius articulates with (anticlockwise from anterior) the proximal
element of the anterior accessory digit, radiale, and intermedium, while
the ulna articulates with the intermedium, ulnare, and proximal element
of the posterior accessory digit. In some specimens (i.e.  BRSMG Ce
16696 and WESTM 1978.219), there can be a small, but not close,
articulation with one of the median proximal carpals. The radius is
almost entirely surrounded by the humerus and distal forelimb elements;
its articular faces are all unfinished. The proximoposterior portion of
the ulna is free and here the ulna thins and the posterior edge is thin
and slightly concave.

[\[BextremusCarplas\]]{#BextremusCarplas label="BextremusCarplas"}

There are three proximal carpals and four distal carpals in
*Brachypterygius extremus* [after @Motani1999], but these have been
displaced when compared to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* by the expansion
and more proximal position of the intermedium, and are therefore not
aligned in the same manner
([\[fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33\]](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33"},
fig. 4). The radiale and ulnare are thickened elements, similar to the
radius and ulna proximally, and quadrate or pentagonal in outline.
Distally, they articulate with two elements of the distal carpal row and
one or two accessory digit elements each. The elements are also pitted
on their articular faces as cartilage intervened. Unlike in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, the radiale and ulnare may not have a
contact with the intermedium medially, and, if present, this is often
very small. There is no contact between the radiale and intermedium in
specimen WESTM 1978.219, nor between the intermedium and ulnare in BRSMG
Ce 16696. If WESTM 1978.219 is the contralateral forelimb to NHMUK PV
R3177, this shows that contact between these elements is variable.

The intermedium in *Brachypterygius extremus* is greatly expanded in
comparison to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*: it is larger than the other
proximal carpals and larger than the radius, matching the size of the
ulna. It is also located more proximally than in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* to articulate with the humerus. To accommodate this placement,
the intermedium is subhexagonal in shape, with a flattened proximal
margin and a pointed distal margin. The intermedium is also thicker than
the other proximal carpals, matching the epipodials. The intermedium
articulates with (clockwise from proximal in the right forelimb, NHMUK
PV R3177) the humerus, radius, variably radiale, distal carpals three
and four, ulnare, and ulna. The radiale and ulnare facets are usually
the smallest. In specimen BRSMG Ce 16696, the distal margin of the
intermedium is flattened rather than pointed. This is because distal
carpal three, and digit three, are positioned more posteriorly, along
the midline of the forelimb, than in other specimens, which could be a
result of the comparatively poorly-developed posterior accessory digit
(see
[\[BextremusAccessorydigits\]](#BextremusAccessorydigits){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusAccessorydigits"}). Much variation is found in the
shape of the intermedium between specimens assigned to this taxon, and
therefore this difference is not considered to be taxonomically
important.

Three distal carpals are present, and their identification follows the
system applied to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* above
([\[OicenicusCarpals\]](#OicenicusCarpals){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusCarpals"}), and the work of @Kirton1983 and
@Motani1999, representing elements 2--4 of the pentadactyl limb. The
distal carpals, along with the more distal rows, are not aligned:
element two is displaced slightly distally relative to the other two.
These elements are more regularly polygonal than the equivalent elements
in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The median two elements are broadly
pentagonal as they articulate with the distal facets of the intermedium,
whereas the more marginal elements are quadrate. Distal carpal two has a
small notch in the middle of both the proximal and distal margins, best
seen in specimen WESTM 1978.219, like many of the more distal elements,
which is roughened and may mark the attachment point of ligaments that
bind the limb elements.

[\[BextremusMetacarpals\]]{#BextremusMetacarpals
label="BextremusMetacarpals"}

The four metacarpals each articulate with one distal carpal proximally.
Metacarpal five is shifted proximally and essentially replaces distal
carpal five (after [@Motani1999];
[\[fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33\]](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33"},
fig. 4). The metacarpals are similarly polygonal, unlike the more
clearly rounded metacarpals of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The
metacarpals and phalanges are more closely positioned to each other in
*Brachypterygius extremus* than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, with less
cartilage intervening. In the holotype, NHMUK PV R3177, metacarpals
three and four are fused along the midline, but with the suture still
visible. @Kirton1983 suggested that this indicated little movement at
this point in the forelimb, , but the cause may be pathological
[@Maxwell2012a]. The metacarpals also have notches in the proximal and
distal margins.

[\[BextremusPrimarydigits\]]{#BextremusPrimarydigits
label="BextremusPrimarydigits"}

The distal elements in the forelimb of *Brachypterygius extremus* are
arranged in straight longitudinal columns, parallel to the proximodistal
long axis of the forelimb
([\[fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33\]](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33"},
fig. 4). This is different to the condition in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, where the proximal metapodial columns are aligned slightly
anterodistally, while the more distal elements are aligned more closely
to the long axis of the forelimb, creating an apparent anterior curve in
the digits. In *Brachypterygius extremus*, there are four primary
digits, supported by the four metacarpals proximally, as is the case in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. However, in BRSMG Ce 16696, the reduced
radiale, proximal carpal four, and metacarpal five reduce the width of
the forelimb in the second row of limb elements
([1.30](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull"}). The holotype ( NHMUK PV R3177)
and WESTM 1978.219 both have eight phalanges preserved in each digit;
the discoidal shape of the distalmost elements suggest these digits are
complete. The other specimens, CAMSM J29864 and BRSMG Ce 16696, have
much longer forelimbs, with 16 elements in the latter specimen. This
disparity in phalangeal number could be diagnostic to separate the
specimens into two species. However, considering other consistencies
between the specimens, in the forelimb and the rest of the skeleton, and
the variability exhibited by ichthyosaur limbs generally (shown in
*Mixosaurus cornalianus* and *Stenopterygius* spp.: [@Maxwell2012a],
tbls 1--4), we still consider both configurations to be representative
of *Brachypterygius extremus*. As the holotype is partially
reconstructed, and thus incomplete, it may be that this specimen and
WESTM 1978.219 do not possess their true number of phalanges. The
history of these specimens is not recorded, so it is difficult to be
certain.

The proximal phalanges in *Brachypterygius extremus* are also clearly
quadrangular, closely spaced and anteroposteriorly elongate, whereas in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* they are rounded, spread out, and
sub-equidimensional. These proximal elements have a median notch in the
proximal and distal margins, like the carpals and metacarpals
proximally. This notch, which is not found in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, may be developed as the elements are closely spaced, with
less cartilage intervening. It would allow the digits to be held rigidly
in their parallel columns. A single additional ossicle is present
between the first and second phalanges of digits three and four of BRSMG
Ce 16696. The phalanges gradually thin and decrease in size distally,
with a sudden large decrease from the level of the third phalanx in the
holotype that might be due to reconstruction [@Kirton1983]. In WESTM
1978.219, the phalanges do not greatly decrease in size until more
distally (around phalanx five). This sudden decrease is not seen as
clearly in BRSMG Ce 16696, and any size decrease distally is more
gradual as it is spread over more elements. Distally, the phalanges
become more rounded and discoidal, particular the two distalmost
elements.

[\[BextremusAccessorydigits\]]{#BextremusAccessorydigits
label="BextremusAccessorydigits"}

*Brachypterygius extremus* possesses two accessory digits, located at
the anterior and posterior margins of the forelimb that extend for more
than one-half the length of the distal forelimb
([\[fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33\]](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body,fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33"},
fig. 4). The most proximal element in each digit is narrow and
teardrop-shaped with a pointed proximal apex and broad distal bulge. In
cross section, these elements are wedge-shaped, strongly narrowing
towards the margins of the forelimb. This shape, coupled with the
thicker median elements gives the forelimb a streamlined shape, as seen
in numerous other ichthyosaurs [@McGowan1992b]. In the anterior
accessory digit, the proximal element articulates with the radius and
radiale, while the proximal element in the posterior digit articulates
with the ulna and ulnare. The close relationship of these elements to
the humerus might suggest contact between the humerus and the
cartilaginous portion of the accessory element. Where this comes
closest, in WESTM 1978.219, there may even be the rudiments of an
additional distal facet on the humerus
([\[BextremusHumerus\]](#BextremusHumerus){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusHumerus"}). The more distal accessory elements are
similar in form to the elements of the primary digits, although
consistently more rounded and slightly smaller. Distally, they shrink
and become discoidal, as in the primary digits. The accessory digits in
*Brachypterygius extremus* are more substantial than in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*, extending for 11 elements in both NHMUK PV R3177 and BRSMG Ce
16696. Associated with the posterior accessory digit, between and
posterior to elements three and four, is an additional ossicle; similar
ossicles may be found in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and other
ichthyosaur taxa.

[\[BextremusPelvis\]]{#BextremusPelvis label="BextremusPelvis"}

No portion of the pelvic girdle or hindlimb is certainly known from
British material of *Brachypterygius extremus*, although elements are
potentially preserved in part of the unprepared portion of BRSMG Ce
16696.

#### Genus NANNOPTERYGIUS [Huene, -@Huene1922b] {#genus-nannopterygius-huene}

[\[NannopterygiusType\]]{#NannopterygiusType label="NannopterygiusType"}

Designated as *Ichthyosaurus enthekiodon* by @Hulke1871 [p. 441] from
the Kimmeridge Clay Formation of Kimmeridge Bay, Kimmeridge, United
Kingdom.

[\[NannopterygiusDiagnosis\]]{#NannopterygiusDiagnosis
label="NannopterygiusDiagnosis"}

As for monotypic species.

[\[NannopterygiusEtymology\]]{#NannopterygiusEtymology
label="NannopterygiusEtymology"}

The generic name *Nannopterygius* is derived from Greek *νανος* 'dwarf'
and *πτέρυγα* 'wing', from the extremely reduced paddles.

[\[NannopterygiusDiscussion\]]{#NannopterygiusDiscussion
label="NannopterygiusDiscussion"}

@Hulke1870a described some fragmentary remains from the Kimmeridge Clay
Formation of Kimmeridge Bay, Dorset, UK, collected by Mr J. C. Mansell.
He placed these in the new genus *Enthekiodon* [Hulke, -@Hulke1870a],
but did not erect a species, noting that they were similar to
*Ichthyosaurus*. The name *Enthekiodon* refers to the apparent insertion
of the teeth into low cups formed by upgrowths of the jaw around the
tooth base [@Hulke1870a]. This likely refers to the low septa found seen
in some jaw specimens, and not indication of non-aulacodonty. The
location of Hulke's [-@Hulke1870a] material is unknown. The following
year, @Hulke1871 named *Ichthyosaurus enthekiodon* from a largely
complete specimen from the same horizon and locality. As he considered
the material to be the same as *Enthekiodon*, @Hulke1871 demoted this
nomen to specific level within the genus *Ichthyosaurus: Ichthyosaurus
enthekiodon*. @Huene1922b erected *Nannopterygius* to receive this
species.

[\[Nenthekiodon\]]{#Nenthekiodon label="Nenthekiodon"}

rlp13cm ? & [-@Hulke1870a] & *Enthekiodon* Hulke; p. 174 \[no specific
name given\] \[Kimmeridge Clay Formation (Kimmeridgian Stage),
Kimmeridge Bay, Kimmeridge, UK\].\
\*v & [-@Hulke1871] & *Ichthyosaurus enthekiodon* Hulke; pl. 17
\[Kimmeridge Clay Formation (Kimmeridgian Stage), Kimmeridge Bay,
Kimmeridge, UK\].\
v & [-@Lydekker1889] & *Ichthyosaurus entheciodon* Hulke; Lydekker,
p. 32, figs 3?, 16 \[unjustified emendation\] \[Kimmeridge Clay
Formation (Kimmeridgian Stage), Weymouth, UK\].\
& *[-@Sauvage1902c]* & *Ichthyosaurus entheciodon* Hulke; Sauvage,
p. 402.\
& [-@Sauvage1911] & *Ichthyosaurus entheciodon* Hulke; Sauvage, p. 442
\[Upper Kimmeridgian, Boulonnais, France\].\
v & [-@Huene1922b] & *Nannopterygius entheciodon* (Hulke); Huene, pp 91,
98, pl. 12, fig. 2 \[cop. Hulke, 1871\].\
& *[-@Huene1923a]* & *Nannopterygius euthecodon* \[*sic.*\] (Hulke);
Huene, p. 467.\
& *[-@McGowan1976]* & *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* (Hulke); McGowan,
p. 671.\
& *[-@Mazin1982]* & ?*Nannopterygius enthekiodon* (Hulke); Mazin,
p. 91.\
\[v & [-@Kirton1983] & *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* (Hulke); Kirton, pp
122--128, fig. 39, pl. 5.\]\
? & [-@Delair1985] & *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* (Hulke); Delair,
p. 133, fig. 9.\
& *[-@Bardet1992]* & *Nannopterygius entheckiodon* \[*sic.*\] (Hulke);
Bardet, p. 654.\
& *[-@Motani1999c]* & *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* (Hulke); Motani,
p. 484.\
& [-@Maisch2000c] & *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* (Hulke); Maisch &
Matzke, p. 81.\
v & [-@McGowan2003] & *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* (Hulke); McGowan &
Motani, p. 109, fig. 91 \[cop. [@Hulke1871]\].\
& *[-@Maisch2010]* & *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* (Hulke); Maisch,
p. 167.

[\[NenthekiodonType\]]{#NenthekiodonType label="NenthekiodonType"}

Holotype: NHMUK PV 46497, a largely complete, but poorly preserved
embedded skeleton designated by @Hulke1871 [p. 441, pl. 17], from the
Kimmeridge Clay Formation of Kimmeridge Bay, Kimmeridge, Dorset, UK. It
is currently on display in the Marine Reptiles Gallery of NHMUK. The
specimen possesses an almost complete, but disrupted skull, much of the
vertebral column and ribcage is present, the coracoids and fragments of
the scapula and clavicles as well as proximal portions of both forelimbs
and a partial hindlimb.

[\[NenthekiodonMaterial\]]{#NenthekiodonMaterial
label="NenthekiodonMaterial"}

The following material was assigned to this species by @Lydekker1889:
NHMUK PV 46497a, a partial right hindlimb (Lydekker listed this as a
forelimb; [\[pl34\]](#pl34){reference-type="ref" reference="pl34"}, figs
1--5) from the same locality and horizon as the holotype; R1197, a
partial skeleton with caudal vertebral centra, pelvis, and left forelimb
from Chapman's Pool, Dorset, and 46473e, a series of 35 vertebral centra
from Foxhangers, Wiltshire; all are from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation.
From the Oxford Clay Formation, @Lydekker1889 included NHMUK PV 47424, a
femur from Peterborough, Cambridgeshire
([\[tbl:Nenthekiodon-specimens\]](#tbl:Nenthekiodon-specimens){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:Nenthekiodon-specimens"}), and R5832, three cervical
vertebrae, from Fletton, Cambridgeshire
([\[pl34\]](#pl34){reference-type="ref" reference="pl34"}, figs 6--8)
was referred subsequently. None of this material is diagnostic.

@Delair1985 [p. 133] identified new specimens ( SOTUG 15181, 15198,
15348, 16566, and 16663) from the Kimmeridge Clay of Rope Lake Head,
Dorset, as *Ophthalmosaurus*
([\[tbl:Nenthekiodon-specimens\]](#tbl:Nenthekiodon-specimens){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:Nenthekiodon-specimens"}). While none of these remains
are truly diagnostic, the coracoids figured [@Delair1985 p. 133, fig. 9]
are similar to those in the holotype of *Nannopterygius enthekiodon*:
elongate, straight intercoracoidal facet, posterolaterally angled
posterior margin: this likely represents a new occurrence for this
taxon. The whereabouts of these specimens is currently unknown. Possibly
related specimens are known from the Tithonian lithographic limestones
of Solnhofen, Germany [@Frickhinger1994; @Bardet2000].

[\[NenthekiodonDiagnosis\]]{#NenthekiodonDiagnosis
label="NenthekiodonDiagnosis"}

Moderately large (jaw length 600 mm, estimated 3000 mm total length)
member of Ophthalmosauridae characterised by: gracile rostrum (less
robust than in *Brachypterygius* and relatively longer than in
*Cryopterygius*); orbital ratio 0.22 (lower than in *Ophthalmosaurus,
Palvennnia*; larger than in *Brachypterygius, Cryopterygius*); teeth
rather small, with fine enamel ridges; 42 presacral vertebrae (42 in
*Ophthalmosaurus*; 47 in *Platypterygius australis*); relatively large
vertebral centra in the sacral region (larger than in
*Ophthalmosaurus*); ribs with single groove proximally (shared with
*Acamptonectes*); strongly reduced pectoral girdle and forelimb
(autapomorphy); coracoids elongate, aspect ratio 1.67, with large,
square anteromedial process (sub-equidimensional, 1.06, and rounded in
*Ophthalmosaurus, Acamptonectes*; smaller anteromedial process in
*Cryopterygius*); two distal humeral facets (three in *Ophthalmosaurus,
Acamptonectes, Aegirosaurus, Caypullisaurus, Undorosaurus,
Brachypterygius, Arthropterygius*); metapodials rounded (polygonal in
*Platypterygius, Sveltonectes, Caypullisaurus*); two distal femoral
facets (three in *Platypterygius americanus, Platypterygius australis,
Platypterygius hercynicus*).

[\[NenthekiodonEtymology\]]{#NenthekiodonEtymology
label="NenthekiodonEtymology"}

The specific name *enthekiodon* derives from the Greek *ένθετα*
'insert', *κούττα* 'cup' and *δόντια* 'teeth', from the supposed
implantation of the teeth in the jaw.

[\[NenthekiodonOccurrence\]]{#NenthekiodonOccurrence
label="NenthekiodonOccurrence"}

Kimmeridgian, Upper Jurassic of southern England, UK.

[\[NenthekiodonDiscussion\]]{#NenthekiodonDiscussion
label="NenthekiodonDiscussion"}

This taxon is poorly known, resulting mostly from a lack of referable
material. Most specimens assigned to *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* are
vertebrae that cannot be distinguished from many other ophthalmosaurids,
or Jurassic ichthyosaurs more generally. The holotype specimen (NHMUK PV
46497) is currently on display in the Marine Reptiles Gallery at the
NHMUK and is inaccessible for detailed study. As of writing (mid-2015),
plans are afoot to make this specimen available. Further specimens from
England and France have been referred to *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* by
@Lydekker1889 and @Sauvage1911, none of which shows diagnostic features
(see
[\[NenthekiodonDiagnosis\]](#NenthekiodonDiagnosis){reference-type="ref"
reference="NenthekiodonDiagnosis"}; [@Kirton1983]). A partial skeleton
from the Tithonian Solnhofen Limestone Formation of south-western
Germany was referred to this taxon by @Frickhinger1994, however, this
has not been fully described and its affinities are uncertain.

*Nannopterygius enthekiodon* was included in Ophthalmosauridae (=
Ophthalmosauria) by @Motani1999c [484] due to its similarity with
*Ophthalmosaurus*, but has not formally been included in a phylogenetic
analysis. @Huene1922b [98] mentioned the similarity of the skull to
*Ophthalmosaurus*: long snout, large orbit, and short postorbital
segment. Synapomorphies of Ophthalmosauridae recovered in the most
recent phylogenetic analysis [@Fischer2013a] cannot easily be applied to
*Nannopterygius enthekiodon* due to the incomplete preservation of the
material. Several characters suggest that *Nannopterygius enthekiodon*
should be included within this clade

postorbital skull \<  1/3 the length of the orbit diameter [@Jiang2005a
character 7; this character is homoplasious and shared with mixosaurids]

posterior dorsal vertebrae \< 3.5× higher than long [@Fischer2013a
character 60; this character is non-homoplasious]

equally-sized proximal and distal humeral anteroposterior lengths: this
is a synapomorphy of Ophthalmosauridae recovered by @Fischer2013a
[character 40] under DELTRAN optimisation

humerus with posteriorly deflected ulna facet [@Fischer2013a character
42] is shared by *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* + *Acamptonectes densus*
clade

femur with prominent dorsal and ventral processes [@Fischer2013a
character 60], this character is an unambiguous and non-homoplasious
synapomorphy of Fischer *et al.*'s [-@Fischer2013a] *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* + *Platypterygius hercynicus* clade within Ophthalmosauridae.

While several of these characters are ambiguous and/or homoplasious,
these together suggest that *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* is likely an
ophthalmosaurid ichthyosaur, however, a full phylogenetic analysis is
required to confirm this.

[\[NenthekiodonSkull\]]{#NenthekiodonSkull label="NenthekiodonSkull"}

The skull is poorly preserved and crushed resulting in the sutures
between bones being difficult to distinguish
([1.34](#fig:Nenthekiodon-full){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Nenthekiodon-full"}). The premaxillae and dentary are
broken towards their anterior ends, but the length of the jaw can be
measured at about 600 mm. These elements are lightly built as in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, and slender, not as robust as in
*Brachypterygius extremus*, and they taper slightly towards the anterior
end. The narial region has largely been lost. Posterior to this, the
orbit can be discerned, but the bones surrounding it, and sclerotic
plates, are heavily fractured. The orbit is not as large in
*Nannopterygius enthekiodon* (McGowan's [-@McGowan1976] orbital ratio:
130 mm/600 mm = 0.217), relative to skull size, as it is in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* ( NHMUK PV R3013: 0.28), but is larger than
in *Brachypterygius extremus* ( CAMSM J68516: 0.174, BRSMG Ce 16696:
0.182). Small parts of the jugal, lachrymal, postorbital, and
postfrontal(?) can be determined around the orbit. These have been
disturbed [@Kirton1983]: the postorbital has moved anteriorly and the
anterior part of the jugal slightly dorsally. The posterior part of the
skull is also heavily fractured and partly obscured by the vertebral
column posteriorly. A small part of the posterior of the lower jaws
remains intact, but the outlines of the bones cannot be observed; it
seems similar to the configuration in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.

![*Nannopterygius enthekiodon* [Hulke, -@Hulke1871]: holotype specimen
(NHMUK PV 46497) in right lateral view (**a**) and outline
interpretation (**b**). Shading marks reconstructed portions. Scale bar
represents 500 mm. Photograph courtesy Natural History Museum, London,
used with permission. [\[fig:Nenthekiodon-full\]]{#fig:Nenthekiodon-full
label="fig:Nenthekiodon-full"}](./img/fig-Nenthekiodon-outline.png){#fig:Nenthekiodon-full
width="\\textwidth"}

[\[NenthekiodonDentition\]]{#NenthekiodonDentition
label="NenthekiodonDentition"}

The first remains that @Hulke1870a assigned to *Enthekiodon* were teeth,
and he described them at length. This description focuses on the bulbous
tooth bases, a character found in all the Upper Jurassic taxa and many
from the Lower Jurassic and Cretaceous [@Kirton1983; @McGowan2003]. None
of the 15 teeth preserved in NHMUK PV 46497 is complete. The largest
crown preserved is 8.8 mm high, implying a tooth index [@McGowan1976] of
(10 × 8.8 mm)/600 mm = 0.147. This is slightly larger than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* (0.140), but smaller than in *Brachypterygius
extremus* (0.197, 0.200). The crowns are slender cones, longitudinally
ridged, with a well-defined enamel base. More basally, the root is
bulbous and appears rounded, although it may be slightly quadrangular,
and is formed largely of cementum, with poorly defined longitudinal
ridges.

[\[NenthekiodonVertebrae\]]{#NenthekiodonVertebrae
label="NenthekiodonVertebrae"}

The holotype specimen has about 65 vertebrae preserved, mostly visible
in approximately right lateral view
([1.34](#fig:Nenthekiodon-full){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Nenthekiodon-full"}). The division between the presacral
and caudal regions (see
[\[OicenicusVertebralcolumn\]](#OicenicusVertebralcolumn){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusVertebralcolumn"}) are in similar positions to
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*: around the 42^nd^ vertebra, although
@Hulke1871 determined the 45^th^. In the anterior centra, the rib facets
are bicipital, with the diapophysis confluent with the neural arch facet
dorsally. These gradually separate, but where this occurs is uncertain,
perhaps around centrum 20--25, and the rib facets move ventrally,
becoming closer. The two rib facets meet at centrum 42, marking the
presacral--caudal split, and the single facet gradually becomes more
rounded posteriorly in the column.

Preservation in the holotype allows little to be seen of the vertebrae
and few measurements can be taken, but they appear to be similar to
those of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. Generally, the height of the centra
increases posteriorly along the presacral portion of the column,
reaching the greatest height around the 42^nd^ vertebra. Whereas the
anterior vertebral centra are relatively small, the centra in the sacral
region are about as large as the largest centra known from
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, despite the body being comparatively
smaller. The caudal vertebral centra gradually decrease in height
posteriorly. Neural spines are preserved with most of the vertebral
centra, and are exposed laterally. Their bases are broad columns and
broaden dorsally into square neural spines that are angled slightly
posterodorsally. There appears to be little overlap between the neural
spines dorsally.

[\[NenthekiodonRibs\]]{#NenthekiodonRibs label="NenthekiodonRibs"}

Many ribs are preserved in the holotype specimen and are generally the
same widely curved form as found in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([1.34](#fig:Nenthekiodon-full){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Nenthekiodon-full"}). The ribs reach their largest size
in the middle of the presacral region, becoming slightly longer and
broader. Proximally, they largely overlap each other and some of the
vertebrae due to taphonomic displacement, obscuring the articular
surfaces. The proximal portion of the rib has a median groove that runs
distally for about one-half of the length of the rib; this part is
slightly more strongly convex than more distally. In the distal part,
the ribs become straighter with rounded cross sections. At the distal
extremity, some ribs are slightly expanded.

[\[NenthekiodonScapula\]]{#NenthekiodonScapula
label="NenthekiodonScapula"}

The proximal portion of the left scapula is partly exposed in NHMUK PV
46497 ([1.35](#fig:Nenthekiodon-pectoral){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Nenthekiodon-pectoral"}). This is expanded and fan-like
proximally, but narrows distally into an elongate blade. The proximal
portion is crushed, but shows an anterior ridge interpreted as the facet
for the clavicle, which may be associated with a well developed acromion
process, similar to that seen in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. Posterior
to this, the scapula has a large, rounded concavity. The proximal margin
is either crushed or is missing. Compared to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*,
the scapula, and pectoral girdle generally, are much smaller relative to
the rest of the body.

![*Nannopterygius enthekiodon* [Hulke, -@Hulke1871]: pectoral girdle and
fore limb elements (holotype: NHMUK PV 46497) in ventral view (**a**)
and interpretation (**b**). Abbreviations: **cl**, clavicle; **lc**,
left coracoid; **lh**, left humerus; **ls**, left scapula; **n**,
anterior notch of the coracoid; **r**, radius; **rc**, right coracoid;
**rs**, right scapula; **rh**, right humerus; **vp?**, probable ventral
process (deltopectoral crest) of the humerus; **u**, ulna. Scale bar
represents 100 mm. Photograph courtesy Natural History Museum, London,
used with permission.
[\[fig:Nenthekiodon-pectoral\]]{#fig:Nenthekiodon-pectoral
label="fig:Nenthekiodon-pectoral"}](./img/fig-Nenthekiodon-pectoral-outline.png){#fig:Nenthekiodon-pectoral
width="\\textwidth"}

[\[NenthekiodonCoracoid\]]{#NenthekiodonCoracoid
label="NenthekiodonCoracoid"}

The coracoids too are relatively smaller in *Nannopterygius enthekiodon*
than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and other ichthyosaurs
([1.35](#fig:Nenthekiodon-pectoral){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Nenthekiodon-pectoral"}). Both are preserved ventral to
the skull in NHMUK PV 46497, articulated with each other along the
midline. The coracoids are also relatively longer and narrower in
*Nannopterygius enthekiodon* than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, largely
as a result of a medial anterior extension. Based on @Kirton1983, the
length to width ratios are: 130.0 mm/77.8 mm = 1.67 in *Nannopterygius
enthekiodon* compared to 190.0 mm/180.0 mm = 1.06 in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* (NHMUK PV R4753). They are plate-like and subquadrangular
bones that meet each other medially along their entire length, rather
than the defined facet along part of the medial margin as seen in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. Anteriorly, the medial portion of the
coracoid is drawn anteriorly into a broad and square anteromedial
process, the anterior margin of which would contact the clavicle.
Lateral to this is a deep embayment in the coracoid, equivalent to the
anterior notch in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, which separates the
anteromedial process from the lateral facets. This embayment shows that
the lateral facets project far laterally [@Kirton1983]. These facets are
placed at about the midpoint of the lateral margin and are directed
laterally and slightly anteriorly. The facets are elongate
anteroposteriorly, but the separation between the scapular and glenoid
contributions cannot be determined. Posterior to the glenoid facet, a
slight emargination is developed in which the bone is unfinished, unlike
the anterior embayment. The posterior margin appears rather straight and
oblique, however, it is uncertain whether this is its true posterior
border as the plaster surrounding it lies flush against the specimen.

[\[NenthekiodonHumerus\]]{#NenthekiodonHumerus
label="NenthekiodonHumerus"}

The humerus is slightly smaller relative to body size than in other
ichthyosaur taxa
([\[fig:Nenthekiodon-full,fig:Nenthekiodon-pectoral\]](#fig:Nenthekiodon-full,fig:Nenthekiodon-pectoral){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Nenthekiodon-full,fig:Nenthekiodon-pectoral"}).
@Kirton1983 compared its size relative to the jaw length: 69.6 mm/600 mm
= 0.116 in *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* (NHMUK PV 46497) compared to
150 mm/940 mm = 0.159 in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* (NHMUK PV R4753).
The humerus in *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* retains much the same form
seen in the other taxa described here. Both humeri in the holotype are
only visible in ventral view. Proximally, the humerus is broad and
slightly convex, but less than the femur (see
[\[NenthekiodonFemur\]](#NenthekiodonFemur){reference-type="ref"
reference="NenthekiodonFemur"}), and extended anteroventrally by the
triangular deltopectoral crest. The proximal and distal ends are
expanded. Distally, the humerus is expanded slightly, to about the same
width as the proximal end, and has two distal facets, unlike the three
facets in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and *Brachypterygius extremus*. The
posterior facet, which articulates with the ulna, is larger, and faces
posterodistally. Anterior to this, the radial facet is separated by a
low ridge and faces anterodistally creating a distinct apex between the
two facets.

[\[NenthekiodonFEpipodialmetapodial\]]{#NenthekiodonFEpipodialmetapodial
label="NenthekiodonFEpipodialmetapodial"}

The epipodials in NHMUK PV 46497 are poorly preserved, and only the left
forelimb preserves both *in situ*
([1.35](#fig:Nenthekiodon-pectoral){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Nenthekiodon-pectoral"}). The radius is the anterior
element and is slightly smaller than the ulna. Both elements are
rounded, subquadrate, and slightly thickened. The right forelimb in the
holotype is disarticulated, but preserves several more distal elements.
These are all well-rounded and slightly thickened. Two proximal and one
distal carpals are present in the left forelimb, arranged in columns
parallel to the long axis of the humerus.

[\[NenthekiodonPelvis\]]{#NenthekiodonPelvis label="NenthekiodonPelvis"}

A small fragment of bone in NHMUK PV R1197 may be part of the ischium,
but is not complete enough to be described. The holotype has been
repaired in this region so the elements are likely lost.

[\[NenthekiodonFemur\]]{#NenthekiodonFemur label="NenthekiodonFemur"}

The femur is small and robust, similar in form to the other taxa
described in this monograph
([\[fig:Nenthekiodon-full,pl34\]](#fig:Nenthekiodon-full,pl34){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Nenthekiodon-full,pl34"}, figs 1--5). @Kirton1983 also
compared this to the jaw length: 10 × 47.9 mm/600 mm = 0.798 in
*Nannopterygius enthekiodon* (NHMUK PV 46497) and 10 × 84.2 mm/940 mm
= 0.896 in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* (NHMUK PV R4752). The proximal
surface is large, convex, and pitted where it was covered by the
articular cartilage, becoming broader dorsoventrally by the large dorsal
and ventral processes. The dorsal process is large and triangular, with
much of the proximal portion contiguous with the pitted proximal
surface. This process is placed along the approximate midline of the
femur, as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, and is directed distally,
approximately parallel to the long axis of the femur. The distal slope
is also more sharply ridged in *Nannopterygius enthekiodon*, extending
for half the femoral length. The ventral process is large and well
developed towards the anteroventral margin of the femur creating a broad
anterior face on the femur that is slightly concave to the midline.
Distally, the diaphysis is slightly constricted, but not as strongly in
the humerus, or in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The broad anterior face
makes the anterior margin here well rounded, while the posterior edge is
sharper. The femur expands distally to about the same width as the
proximal head. There are two equal-sized distal facets that articulate
with the tibia (anterior) and fibula, separated by a ridge. Each faces
distally with the fibular facet directed slightly anteriorly and the
tibial facet slightly posteriorly.

[\[NenthekiodonHEpipodialsmetapodials\]]{#NenthekiodonHEpipodialsmetapodials
label="NenthekiodonHEpipodialsmetapodials"}

The fibula and tibia articulate with the distal femur
([\[pl34\]](#pl34){reference-type="ref" reference="pl34"}, figs 1--5).
Both are rounded discoidal elements, similar to *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*. The tibia is the anteriormost, smaller, subpentagonal element
and meets the femur, intermedium, and fibula. Posterior to this, the
fibula is about twice the size of the tibia and also subpentagonal. It
contacts the femur, tibia, intermedium, and second distal carpal.

The astragalus, second distal tarsal, and another distal tarsal are
preserved in NHMUK PV 46497a. They are rounded elements, much smaller
than the tibia and placed distally. Proximally, the astragalus is
pointed and projects between the distal fibula and tibia. These elements
have not been prepared sufficiently to allow further description.

#### Genus MACROPTERYGIUS [Huene, -@Huene1922b] {#Macropterygiusspindet}

[\[MacropterygiusMaterial\]]{#MacropterygiusMaterial
label="MacropterygiusMaterial"}

Three humeri: NHMUK PV 42286, a left humerus from the Kimmeridge Clay
Formation of the Isle of Portland, Dorset; OUMNH J12031, a left humerus
from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation of Cumnor, Oxfordshire, and J68534, a
right humerus from recent gravels at St Helens, Abingdon, Oxfordshire,
but most likely derived from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation.

[\[MacropterygiusDiagnosis\]]{#MacropterygiusDiagnosis
label="MacropterygiusDiagnosis"}

Member of Ophthalmosauridae characterised by: humerus with large, well
developed dorsal and ventral processes (small deltopectoral crest in
*Cryopterygius*); two distal humeral facets (shared with *Cryopterygius,
Nannopterygius, Platypterygius*); anterior distal humeral facet larger
than posterior distal humeral facet (shared with *Cryopterygius*).

[\[MacropterygiusEtymology\]]{#MacropterygiusEtymology
label="MacropterygiusEtymology"}

The generic name *Macropterygius* is derived from the Greek *μάκρος*
'long' and *πτέρυγα* 'wing', from the large number of digit elements.

[\[MacropterygiusOccurrence\]]{#MacropterygiusOccurrence
label="MacropterygiusOccurrence"}

Kimmeridgian (Upper Jurassic) of Dorset and Oxfordshire, United Kingdom,
and France.

[\[MacropterygiusDiscussion\]]{#MacropterygiusDiscussion
label="MacropterygiusDiscussion"}

@Owen1840b [124] erected *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* on a cervical vertebra
from the collection of Ms Eltheldred Benett
[@Spamer1989; @Spamer1991; @ICZN1993; @Spamer1995]. When this specimen
was thought lost, @Phillips1871 [335] applied *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*
to several vertebrae from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation; none of this
material is diagnostic, therefore *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* is considered
a *nomen dubium* (see [\[Itrigonus\]](#Itrigonus){reference-type="ref"
reference="Itrigonus"}). Much other material was subsequently referred
to *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* [e.g.
@Lydekker1889; @Sauvage1888; @Sauvage1894; @Sauvage1902; @Sauvage1902a; @Sauvage1902b; @Sauvage1902c; @Sauvage1911],
including particularly humeral material. @Huene1922b [98] erected the
genus *Macropterygius* to include *Ichthyosaurus trigonus, Ichthyosaurus
dilatatus,* and *Ichthyosaurus ovalis*, among other taxa, none of which
are valid (see [1.5.2](#Taxainvalida){reference-type="ref"
reference="Taxainvalida"} and [@McGowan1976; @McGowan2003]). However,
@Huene1922b [98] included a diagnosis for *Macropterygius*, based in
part on the forelimb material of @Sauvage1911. This diagnosis agrees
with the humeral material referred here to *Macropterygius*
sp. indet. and described below ( NHMUK PV 42286, and OUMNH J12031 and
J68534), and is different enough to warrant a separate genus. Therefore,
we retain *Macropterygius* as a valid genus, however, we do not consider
the available material to be complete enough to erect a new species.
Until more complete material becomes available, we refer these specimens
to *Macropterygius* sp. indet., and provide a basic diagnosis of the
genus *Macropterygius*.

@Huene1922b [98] characterised *Macropterygius* by a robust snout;
smaller orbit than *Ophthalmosaurus* \[found in almost all
Ichthyosauria\]; maxilla does not contact the external naris \[found in
several ichthyosaur taxa, mostly within Parvipelvia,
e.g. *Temnodontosaurus, Brachypterygius, Maiaspondylus*\]; teeth with
cementum around the root dentine and sharp, narrow ridges on the crown
\[plications; primitive for Ichthyosauria, re-evolved in
Platypterygiinae: [@Maxwell2011a; @Maxwell2012d]\]; biciptal ribs,
except the posterior \[found in Parvipelvia\]; coracoid shorter and
broader than in *Nannopterygius* \[similar to other Ophthalmosauridae\];
shoulder girdle with three separate bones \[status uncertain: this is
assumed to refer to the clavicle, scapula, and coracoid on each side, in
which case this is primitive to Ichthyosauriformes\]; humerus with
strong and large lateral process \[dorsal or ventral process?; shared
with Ophthalmosauridae\], articulates distally with two bones \[similar
to *Cryopterygius, Platypterygius, Nannopterygius*\]; latipinnate and
elongate forelimb construction. @Delair1959 [66] later assigned
*Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus* to *Macropterygius*
([\[Ithyreospondylus\]](#Ithyreospondylus){reference-type="ref"
reference="Ithyreospondylus"}). @McGowan1976 [670] considered all
species assigned to this genus to be *taxa dubia* thereby making
*Macropterygius* a *taxon dubium* also; @Kirton1983 [139] and
@McGowan2003 [129] also considered *Macropterygius* a *nomen dubium*.
The humeri described below are consistent with Huene's [-@Huene1922b 98]
diagnosis for *Macropterygius*, based upon the material of @Sauvage1911.

One humerus in the NHMUK, PV 42286, and two humeri in the OUMNH
collections, J12031 and J68534, can be clearly separated from other
ichthyosaur taxa. The OUMNH specimens are each accompanied by a note:
"Almost certainly *Platypterygius*. C. McGowan 31/8/2000". These humeri
clearly have only two distal facets, unlike *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
and *Brachypterygius extremus* (see
[\[OicenicusHumerus,BextremusHumerus\]](#OicenicusHumerus,BextremusHumerus){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusHumerus,BextremusHumerus"}). Furthermore, the
anterior facet, probably articulating with the radius, is much larger
than the posterior facet (see
[\[MacropterygiusHumerus\]](#MacropterygiusHumerus){reference-type="ref"
reference="MacropterygiusHumerus"}). This precludes assigning these
specimens to *Platypterygius*, in which the posterior (ulnar) facet is
larger [@McGowan2003]. This configuration of distal humeral facets is
also different from *Aegirosaurus leptospondylus*, in which there are
clearly three distal humeral facets, as in *Brachypterygius extremus*,
and the radial and ulnar facets are similarly sized, or the ulnar facet
may be larger [@Bardet2000]. Taxa in which the radial facet is larger
than the ulnar include *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus, Caypullisaurus
bonapartei, Arthropterygius chrisorum,* and *Acamptonectes densus*.
These four taxa all have three distal facets that articulate with the
anterior accessory element, radius, and ulna respectively
[@Russell1993; @Fernandez1997a; @McGowan2003; @Maxwell2010; @Fischer2012].
The size of the anterior facet is variable within and between species,
and may be strongly reduced. None of these specimens show any evidence
for a rudimentary facet anterior to the radial facet. The most similar
form to this humerus is found in *Cryopterygius kristiansenae*, which
has comparably sized distal facets, although the radial facet is not as
large in this taxon as in NHMUK PV 42286, and OUMNH J12031 and J68534.
However, in *Cryopterygius kristiansenae* the deltopectoral crest is
smaller than in those specimens, without the distinct anterior and
concavities, and is more posteriorly placed [@Druckenmiller2012a].
Similarly, while *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* also possesses two distal
humeral facets, the ulnar facet is the larger and the deltopectoral
crest does not appear as large as in these Ophthalmosauridae
indet. specimens
([\[NenthekiodonHumerus\]](#NenthekiodonHumerus){reference-type="ref"
reference="NenthekiodonHumerus"}). The recently described *Sisteronia
seeleyi* [Fischer *et al.*, -@Fischer2014a] does have a larger radial
facet than the ulnar facet, however, this taxon also possesses a
posterior distal humeral facet, but the anterior and proximal regions
are broken, which make uncertain the presence of an anterior facet. The
morphology of these humeri does have clear affinities to the specimen
described by @Sauvage1911 [434--441] as *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*
([\[Itrigonus\]](#Itrigonus){reference-type="ref"
reference="Itrigonus"}); these were separated by @Huene1922b [98] as
*Macropterygius*.

Based on characters of the humerus, *Macropterygius* can be referred to
Ophthalmosauridae. This is based upon the large, plate-like dorsal
process and large deltopectoral crest, surrounded by concavities
[@Fischer2013a]. The latter character may indicate affinities to the
clade Platypterygiinae, whereas the lack of anterior accessory digit
suggests it is more basal within Ophthalmosauridae.

[\[Macropterygiusindet\]]{#Macropterygiusindet
label="Macropterygiusindet"}

[\[MacropterygiusHumerus\]]{#MacropterygiusHumerus
label="MacropterygiusHumerus"}

The humeri are short and robust, and expanded proximally and distally
with a slightly constricted diaphysis
([\[pl30\]](#pl30){reference-type="ref" reference="pl30"}). The proximal
surface is convex and irregularly pitted for application of cartilage.
Dorsally, this surface extends onto the high dorsal process, which is
worn and broken in all specimens, and extends distally, and slightly
anteriorly, for about one-half of the humeral length, as in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[OicenicusHumerus\]](#OicenicusHumerus){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusHumerus"}) and *Brachypterygius extremus*
([\[BextremusHumerus\]](#BextremusHumerus){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusHumerus"}). There is also a high deltopectoral crest
ventrally, placed anteriorly, and with a similar, plate-like form to the
dorsal process, with large concavities anteriorly and posteriorly.
Compared to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, the proximal edges of these
processes slope more distally, giving the proximal humerus a narrower
and more rounded appearance in anterior and posterior view. The
processes do not seem as large as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and
*Brachypterygius extremus*, but this may be due to crushing and
breakage. The diaphysis is the same as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*,
with a broad, rounded anterior edge, and sharper posterior edge. There
is rather less expansion of the humerus distally than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and *Brachypterygius extremus*, so the
constriction at the diaphysis appears less pronounced.

Distally, the humerus expands, more strongly anteriorly, and broadens to
accommodate the distal facets. Both the anterodistal and posterodistal
apices are acute, but less acute than in the above taxa. There are two
large, concave distal facets, subtriangular in shape and rugose where
cartilage would be present, separated by a distinct ridge. The anterior
facet would probably articulate with the radius and faces distally and
slightly anteriorly. This is much wider dorsoventrally than the
posterior facet. The posterior facet, about two-thirds the size of the
anterior, probably articulated with the ulna, and faces more strongly
posterodistally, so that a clear obtuse angle is subtended in the distal
margin in dorsoventral view. A much lower, incomplete ridge is present
slightly posterior to the main ridge between these facets in OUMNH
J68534. This may indicate articulation with a third element distally.
Compared to the other facets, the area formed is tiny and directed
slightly posteriorly, unlike the form taken in *Brachypterygius
extremus*. As the posterior ridge is incomplete, it suggests any contact
would not be close, and may be a result of variation in the paddle
configuration.

### Taxa invalida {#Taxainvalida}

The following are invalid names for British Middle and Upper Jurassic
taxa, which are listed under each genus in alphabetical order of the
species name. Discussion on global taxa is given by @McGowan1976 and
@McGowan2003.

#### Genus ICHTHYOSAURUS [König, -@Konig1818] {#genus-ichthyosaurus-könig}

[\[Iadvena\]]{#Iadvena label="Iadvena"}

rlp13cm &[-@Phillips1871] &*Ichthyosaurus advena* Phillips; p. 183
\[Stonesfield Member, Taynton Limestone Formation (Bathonian Stage),
Stonesfield, Oxfordshire, UK\].\
&*[-@McGowan1976]* &*Ichthyosaurus advena* Phillips; McGowan, p. 670
\[*nom. nud.*\].\
&*[-@McGowan2003]* &*Ichthyosaurus advena* Phillips; McGowan & Motani,
p. 139 \[*nom. nud.*\].\

*Nomen nudum*.

Vertebrae from the Stonesfield Member, Taynton Limestone Formation
(Bathonian Stage) of Stonesfield, United Kingdom, designated by
@Phillips1871 [p. 183].

@Phillips1871 proposed this taxon for ichthyosaur vertebrae from the
Stonesfield Slate of Stonesfield, but did not provide a definition,
description, or figure, nor did he assign a type specimen.
*Ichthyosaurus advena* should therefore be considered a *nomen nudum*;
@McGowan1976 [p. 670] also considered this a *nomen nudum*.

[\[Iaequalis\]]{#Iaequalis label="Iaequalis"}

rlp13cm \* & [-@Phillips1871] & *Ichthyosaurus æqualis* Phillips; p. 339
\[Kimmeridge Clay Formation (Kimmeridgian Stage), Shotover, Oxfordshire,
UK\].\
& *[-@McGowan1976]* & *Ichthyosaurus aequalis* Phillips; McGowan
\[*tax. dub.*\].\
\[ & *[-@Kirton1983]* & *Ichthyosaurus aequalis* Phillips; Kirton,
p. 136 \[*nom. dub.*\].\]\
& *[-@McGowan2003]* & *Ichthyosaurus aequalis* Phillips; McGowan &
Motani, p. 130 \[*nom. dub.*\].

*Nomen dubium*.

One caudal vertebra designated by @Phillips1871 [339] from the
Kimmeridge Clay Formation of Shotover, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom.
Phillips did not designate a type; the only specimen assigned to this
taxon is OUMNH J12424.

@Phillips1871 separated this species by a single excavated apophysis
placed halfway on the side of the central body. This feature is seen
generally in the middle caudal region of Jurassic ichthyosaur taxa, and
should not be regarded as distinctive. @McGowan1976 [p. 670] and
@Kirton1983 [p. 138] found this taxon to be a *taxon dubium* and *nomen
dubium* respectively.

[\[Ichalarodeirus\]]{#Ichalarodeirus label="Ichalarodeirus"}

rlp13cm & [-@Seeley1869] & *Ichthyosaurus chalarodeirus* Seeley; p. 106
\[Kimmeridge Clay Formation (Kimmeridgian Stage), Chettisham,
Cambridgeshire, UK\].\
& *[-@Lydekker1888]* & *Ichthyosaurus calorodirus* \[*sic.*\] Seeley;
Lydekker, p. 312 \[*lapsus calami*\].\
& *[-@Huene1922b]* & *'Ichthyosaurus' chalarodirus* \[*sic.*\] Seeley;
Huene, p. 93.\
& *[-@McGowan1976]* & *Ichthyosaurus chalarodeirus* Seeley; McGowan
\[*nom. nud.*\].\
\[ & *[-@Kirton1983]* & *Ichthyosaurus chalarodeirus* Seeley; Kirton,
p. 136 \[*nom. nud.*\].\]\
& *[-@McGowan2003]* & *Ichthyosaurus chalarodeirus* Seeley; McGowan &
Motani, p. 139 \[*nom. nud.*\].

*Nomen nudum*.

CAMSM J29777: an unfused axis vertebra designated by @Seeley1869
[p. 106] from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation of Chettisham,
Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom.

@Seeley1869 [p. 106] did not include a description, diagnosis, or figure
for the naming of *Ichthyosaurus chalarodeirus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1869],
so this action does not constitute an indication under Article 12.3 of
the ICZN [@ICZN2012 amended 2012]. Therefore, *Ichthyosaurus
chalarodeirus* should be considered a *nomen nudum*; this was also
concluded by @McGowan1976 [p. 670]. The same applies also to
*Ichthyosaurus hygrodeirus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1869] (see
[\[Ihygrodeirus\]](#Ihygrodeirus){reference-type="ref"
reference="Ihygrodeirus"}).

[\[Idilatatus\]]{#Idilatatus label="Idilatatus"}

rlp13cm \* & [-@Phillips1871] & *Ichthyosaurus dilatatus* Phillips; pp
307 \[Oxford Clay Formation (Callovian Stage), Oxford, UK\], 339
\[Kimmeridge Clay Formation (Kimmeridgian Stage), Shotover, Oxfordshire,
UK\].\
& [-@Lydekker1889] & *Ichthyosaurus? dilatatus* Phillips; Lydekker,
p. 30.\
& *[-@Sauvage1894]* & *Ophthalmosaurus dilatatus* (Phillips); Sauvage,
p. 926 \[Middle Portlandian, Boulonnais, France\].\
& [-@Bauer1898] & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* Owen; Bauer, p. 325 \[senior
subjective synonym\].\
& *[-@Delair1959]* & *Macropterygius dilatatus* (Phillips); Delair,
p. 65.\
& *[-@McGowan1976]* & *Ichthyosaurus dilatatus* Phillips; McGowan
\[*tax. dub.*\].\
\[ & *[-@Kirton1983]* & *Ichthyosaurus dilatatus* Phillips; Kirton,
p. 137 \[*nom. dub.*\].\]\
& *[-@McGowan2003]* & *Ichthyosaurus dilatatus* Phillips; McGowan &
Motani, p. 131 \[*nom. dub.*\].

*Nomen dubium*.

"A considerable number" of dorsal and caudal vertebrae were assigned to
this species by @Phillips1871 [339] from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation
of Oxfordshire, United Kingdom. Also, three cervical and ten dorsal
vertebrae from the Oxford Clay Formation at St Clements, Oxford, United
Kingdom [@Phillips1871 307]. @Delair1959 cited OUMNH J12494 as the type
specimen. Specimens have been found in Cowley Fields, Oxford (OUMNH
J12494) and Swindon (NHMUK PV 45984--7), United Kingdom.

This taxon is separated by having broader vertebrae than *Ichthyosaurus
trigonus* and thicker vertebrae than *Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus*
([\[Ithyreospondylus,Itrigonus\]](#Ithyreospondylus,Itrigonus){reference-type="ref"
reference="Ithyreospondylus,Itrigonus"}). @Phillips1871 [307] also
listed dimensions for the cervical vertebrae; no figures are given.
These specimens are non-diagnostic and insufficient to separate the
taxon [@McGowan1976 670; @Kirton1983 137] and so *Ichthyosaurus
dilatatus* [Phillips, -@Phillips1871] should be considered a *nomen
dubium*. Specimen NHMUK PV 45984--7, assigned to *Ichthyosaurus?
dilatatus*, may be referred to *Brachypterygius extremus*
([\[BextremusMaterial\]](#BextremusMaterial){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusMaterial"}).

[\[Ihygrodeirus\]]{#Ihygrodeirus label="Ihygrodeirus"}

rlp13cm & [-@Seeley1869] & *Ichthyosaurus hygrodeirus* Seeley; p. 106
\[Kimmeridge Clay Formation (Kimmeridgian Stage), Stretham,
Cambridgeshire, UK\].\
& *[-@Lydekker1888]* & *Ichthyosaurus hygrodirus* \[*sic.*\] Seeley;
Lydekker, p. 312 \[*lapsus calami*\].\
& *[-@Huene1922b]* & *'Ichthyosaurus' hyrodirus* \[*sic.*\] Seeley;
Huene, p. 94.\
& *[-@McGowan1976]* & *Ichthyosaurus hygrodeirus* Seeley; McGowan
\[*nom. nud.*\].\
\[ & *[-@Kirton1983]* & *Ichthyosaurus hygrodeirus* Seeley; Kirton,
p. 137 \[*nom. nud.*\].\]\
& *[-@McGowan2003]* & *Ichthyosaurus hygrodeirus* Seeley, McGowan &
Motani, p. 139 \[*nom. nud.*\].

*Nomen nudum*.

Specimen CAMSM J29780: an unfused axis vertebra designated by
@Seeley1869 [p. 106] from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation of Stretham,
Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom.

See the discussion above for *Ichthyosaurus chalarodeirus*
([\[Ichalarodeirus\]](#Ichalarodeirus){reference-type="ref"
reference="Ichalarodeirus"}).

[\[Imegalodeirus\]]{#Imegalodeirus label="Imegalodeirus"}

rlp13cm & [-@Seeley1869] & *Ichthyosaurus megalodeirus* Seeley; p. 111
\[Oxford Clay Formation (Callovian Stage), Peterborough, Cambridgeshire,
UK\].\
& *[-@Lydekker1888]* & *Ichthyosaurus megalodirus* \[*sic.*\] Seeley;
Lydekker, p. 312 \[*lapsus calami*\]\
& *[-@Huene1922b]* & *'Ichthyosaurus' megalodirus* \[*sic.*\] Seely
\[*sic.*\]; Huene, p. 93 \["probably an *Ophthalmosaurus*"\].\
\[ & *[-@Kirton1983]* & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Kirton,
p. 137 \[*Ichthyosaurus megalodeirus* is a senior synonym, but rejected
under ICZN Article 23(a--b) (= Article 23.9; [@ICZN2012 amended
2012])\].\]\
& *[-@McGowan2003]* & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; McGowan &
Motani, p. 113 \[*nom. nud.*\].

*Nomen nudum*.

Specimens CAMSM J65710--J65765: one individual including skull elements
([\[pl36,pl37\]](#pl36,pl37){reference-type="ref"
reference="pl36,pl37"}), 95 vertebrae (including the atlas-axis
complex), and various girdle elements
([\[pl38\]](#pl38){reference-type="ref" reference="pl38"}; [listed in
@Seeley1869 pp 111--115]) from the Oxford Clay Formation of
Peterborough, United Kingdom. Designated by @Seeley1869 [p. 111] as
*Ichthyosaurus megalodeirus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1869].

@Seeley1869 did not describe or figure this specimen beyond listing what
elements were present, which does not meet the requirements for an
indication under Article 12.3 of the ICZN [@ICZN2012 amended 2012]. This
taxon should thus be considered a *nomen nudum* [@McGowan2003 p. 113],
not a senior synonym for *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* as proposed by
@Kirton1983 [p. 137]. In this case, ICZN Article 23.9 ('Reversal of
precedence'; [@ICZN2012 amended 2012]) need not be enacted. Examination
of the material for this taxon shows it is consistent with the type and
referred material of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and the material may be
referred to that taxon. See also the taxonomic discussion of
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[OicenicusDiscussion\]](#OicenicusDiscussion){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusDiscussion"}).

[\[Iovalis\]]{#Iovalis label="Iovalis"}

rlp13cm \* & [-@Phillips1871] & *Ichthyosaurus ovalis* Phillips; p. 339
\[Kimmeridge Clay Formation (Kimmeridgian Stage), Swindon, Wiltshire,
Shotover, Oxfordshire, and Kimmeridge, Dorset, UK\].\
& [-@Lydekker1889] & *Ichthyosaurus ovalis* Phillips; Lydekker, p. 29,
fig. 15.\
& [-@Bauer1898] & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* Owen; Bauer, p. 325 \[senior
subjective synonym\].\
& *[-@Huene1922b]* & *Macropterygius? ovalis* (Phillips); Huene, p. 98.\
& *[-@Delair1959]* & *Macropterygius ovalis* (Phillips); Delair, p. 65.\
\[ & *[-@Kirton1983]* & *Ichthyosaurus ovalis* Phillips; Kirton, p. 138
\[*nom. dub.*\].\]\
& *[-@McGowan2003]* & *Ichthyosaurus ovalis* Phillips; McGowan & Motani,
p. 133 \[*nom. dub.*\].

*Nomen dubium*.

Vertebrae from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation of Swindon, Shotover and
Kimmeridge, United Kingdom, designated by @Phillips1871 [339], probably
OUMNH J12487, J12488/1--2, and J12489/1--2 [assigned by @Delair1959].
Also, NHMUK PV 42282, a dorsal vertebra, and 44637, 43 anterior dorsal
to caudal vertebral centra; OUMNH J10473, J10480, J10482/1--2, and
J12421, all vertebrae, are referred to this taxon.

@Phillips1871 did not designate a type specimen or figure the vertebrae
he assigned to this taxon, although he did give measurements for one
centrum (OUMNH J12488/1). *Ichthyosaurus ovalis* is separated by the
oval outline of the vertebrae, higher than broad, and two posterior
dorsal vertebrae have ventrally placed rib facets "in the situation
occupied by the hæmapophysis of a crocodilian reptile" [@Phillips1871
p. 339]. These specimens are not distinctive, nor diagnostic, therefore
*Ichthyosaurus ovalis* should be regarded as a *nomen dubium*.
@McGowan1976 regarded this as a *taxon dubium*.

[\[Ithyreospondylus\]]{#Ithyreospondylus label="Ithyreospondylus"}

rlp13cm \* & [-@Owen1840] & *Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus* Owen; p. 124
\[unknown horizon and locality\].\
& [-@Phillips1871] & *Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus* Owen; Phillips, pp
307 \[Oxford Clay Formation (Callovian Stage), Buckingham, UK\], 337,
figs 129--131 \[Kimmeridge Clay Formation (Kimmeridgian Stage),
Oxfordshire and Weymouth, Dorset, UK\].\
? & [-@Owen1881] & *Ichthyosaurus brachyspondylus* Owen; p. 127, pl. 33,
figs 3--6 \[Liassic formations (Lower Jurassic Series), UK, Russia\].\
& *[-@Sauvage1888]* & *Ichthyosaurus* aff. *thyreospondylus* Owen;
Sauvage, p. 629 \[Kimmeridgian, Wilmille, Auvringhen, France\].\
& [-@Lydekker1889] & *Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus* Phillips (*ex*
Owen); Lydekker, p. 34.\
& *[-@Sauvage1902b]* & *Ichthyosaurus thyreospondybus* \[*sic.*\] Owen;
Sauvage, p. 403 \[*lapsus calami*\].\
& [-@Sauvage1911] & *Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus* Philips \[*sic.*\];
Sauvage, p. 443 \[Middle Portlandian, Boulonnais, France\] \[authority
listed as [@Phillips1871]\].\
& [-@Sauvage1911] & *Ophthalmosaurus thyreospondilus* \[*sic.*\] Owen;
Sauvage p. 445 \[*lapsus calami*\].\
& [-@Huene1922b] & *Ophthalmosaurus thyreospondylus* (Owen); Huene,
p. 91.\
& *[-@Delair1959]* & *Macropterygius? thyreospondylus* (Owen); Delair,
p. 66.\
& *[-@McGowan1976]* & *Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus* Owen; McGowan,
p. 670 \[*tax. dub.*\].\
\[ & *[-@Kirton1983]* & *Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus* Owen; Kirton,
p. 138 \[*nom. dub.*\].\]\
& *[-@McGowan2003]* & *Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus* Owen; McGowan &
Motani, p. 134 \[*nom. dub.*\].

*Nomen dubium*.

Five vertebrae designated by @Owen1840 [p. 124] in BRSMG that have since
been destroyed [@Kirton1983]. Several vertebrae figured by @Phillips1871
[figs 129--131] are possibly Owen's holotype specimens
[@Woodward1890; @McGowan1976]. The following specimens have been
assigned to this taxon: NHMUK PV R1684, a caudal vertebral centrum from
the Portlandian of the Isle of Portland; OUMNH J10479, J10492, J10508,
J12066, J12306, J12307, J12423, J12426, J12464, J12467, J12469, J12472,
J12474, J12478, J12485, J12492, J12495 from the Kimmeridge Clay
Formation, and J12496 from the Oxford Clay Formation, all of which are
vertebrae.

*Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus* was separated by a dorsal triangular
convexity on the anterior and posterior faces of the centra; this is
found in all Upper Jurassic taxa. None of the material listed above
includes diagnostic remains, so *Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus* is
rejected as a *nomen dubium*. @McGowan1976 considered this a *taxon
dubium*, @Kirton1983 a *nomen dubium*.

[\[Itrigonus\]]{#Itrigonus label="Itrigonus"}

rlp13cm \* & [-@Owen1840] & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* Owen; p. 124
\[Kimmeridge Clay Formation (Kimmeridgian Stage), Westbrooke, in
Bromham, Bedfordshire, UK\].\
& [-@Wagner1852] & *Ichthyosaurus posthumus* Wagner; p. 702, pl. 4, figs
4, 5 \[Solnhofen Limestone Formation (Tithonian Stage), Bavaria,
Germany\].\
*non* & [-@Valenciennes1861] & *Ichthyosaurus cuvieri* Valenciennes;
p. 273 \[Kimmeridge Clay Formation (Kimmeridgian Stage), Boulogne,
France\].\
*non* & [-@Valenciennes1861a] & *Ichthyosaurus normanniae* Valenciennes;
p. 1001 \[Kimmeridge Clay Formation (Kimmeridgian Stage), Bléville,
France\].\
& [-@Phillips1871] & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* Owen; Phillips, p. 335,
figs 126--128 \[Kimmeridge Clay Formation (Kimmeridgian Stage),
Shotover, Oxfordshire and Swindon, Wiltshire, UK\].\
& [-@Lydekker1889] & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* Owen; Lydekker, p. 22.\
? & [-@Lydekker1889] & *Ichthyosaurus cuvieri* Valenciennes; Lydekker,
p. 22.\
? & [-@Lydekker1889] & *Ichthyosaurus normanniae* Valenciennes;
Lydekker, p. 22.\
& *[-@Sauvage1894]* & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* Owen; Sauvage, p. 926.\
? & *[-@Sauvage1894]* & *Ichthyosaurus* aff. *trigonus* Owen; Sauvage,
p. 926.\
& [-@Bauer1898] & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* Owen; Bauer, p. 325.\
& *[-@Sauvage1902c]* & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* Owen; Sauvage, p. 402
\[Middle Kimmeridgian, Boulonnais\].\
? *non* & [-@Sauvage1902b] & *Ophthalmosaurus cuvieri* (Valenciennes);
Sauvage, p. 386.\
? *non* & [-@Sauvage1902a] & *Ophthalmosaurus cuvieri* (Valenciennes);
Sauvage, p. 29, pl. 5, fig. 7.\
& *[-@Merriam1908]* & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus posthumus* (Owen);
Merriam, p. 40.\
? *non* & [-@Sauvage1911] & *Ophthalmosaurus cuvieri* (Valenciennes);
Sauvage, p. 426 \[Middle Kimmeridgian, Le Havre, France\].\
& [-@Sauvage1911] & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* Owen; Sauvage, p. 434
\[Upper Kimmeridgian, Boulogne-sur-Mer, France\].\
? *non* & [-@Sauvage1911] & *Ichthyosaurus normanniae* Valenciennes;
Sauvage, p. 441 \[Kimmeridge Clay Formation, Bléville, France\].\
& [-@Huene1922b] & *Macropterygius trigonus* (Owen); Huene, p. 92--93.\
& *[-@Delair1959]* & *Macropterygius trigonus* (Owen); Delair, p. 64.\
& *[-@McGowan1976]* & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* Owen; McGowan, p. 670
\[*tax. dub.*\].\
\[ & *[-@Kirton1983]* & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* Owen; Kirton, p. 139
\[*nom. dub.*\].\]\
& *[-@Spamer1989]* & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* Owen; Spamer *et al.*, pp
118, 144, 158, pl. 13, fig. 1a--c.\
& *[-@Spamer1991]* & *Macropterygius trigonus* (Owen); Spamer &
Torrens.\
& *[-@McGowan2003]* & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* Owen; McGowan & Motani,
p. 134 \[*nom. dub.*\].

*Nomen dubium*.

A vertebral centrum from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation of Westbrooke, in
Bromham, Bedfordshire, United Kingdom, in the collection of Ms Etheldred
Benett, designated by @Owen1840 [p. 124]. The holotype was thought to be
lost [@Delair1959 p. 64], so @Lydekker1889 proposed Phillips'
[-@Phillips1871 p. 335] specimens as replacement: OUMNH J12064, J12483,
J12491, a dorsal vertebra, ankylosed atlas-axis complex, and caudal
vertebra respectively. Ms Benett's collection had been donated to the
Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia after her death. The
holotype specimen of *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*, a single anterior
vertebral centrum, was rediscovered following cataloguing of this
collection, and the original holotype (ANSP 10124) reinstated
[@Spamer1989; @Spamer1991; @ICZN1993; @Spamer1995]. Numerous further
specimens from the United Kingdom and France have been assigned to
*Ichthyosaurus trigonus* and are present in NHMUK and OUMNH, mostly
vertebrae, but see the discussion below
([\[ItrigonusDiscussion\]](#ItrigonusDiscussion){reference-type="ref"
reference="ItrigonusDiscussion"}).

[\[ItrigonusDiscussion\]]{#ItrigonusDiscussion
label="ItrigonusDiscussion"}

@Owen1840 separated this taxon on the basis of the straight ventral
margins on the centrum, converging at 70°, and the broad dorsal side.
This is common to all ophthalmosaurid anterior vertebral centra; those
immediately posterior to the atlas-axis. @Phillips1871 [figs 126--128]
did not figure the holotype (*contra* [@Woodward1890; @McGowan1976]).
The holotype was figured by @Spamer1989 [pl. 13, fig. 1a--c]. This
vertebral material is non-diagnostic, leading @McGowan1976 [p. 670] and
@Kirton1983 [p. 139] to consider this a *taxon dubium* and *nomen
dubium* respectively. @Bauer1898 considered several Upper Jurassic
species to be referable to this species, including *Ichthyosaurus
cuvieri, Ichthyosaurus dilatatus, Ichthyosaurus normanniae,
Ichthyosaurus ovalis, Ichthyosaurus posthumus, Ichthyosaurus
thyreospondylus,* and *Ophthalmosaurus*. Many specimens have been
assigned to this taxon, among which are NHMUK PV 42284, a humerus that
has here been referred to Ophthalmosauridae indet. (see
[1.5.1.6](#Macropterygiusspindet){reference-type="ref"
reference="Macropterygiusspindet"}).

Following Valenciennes' [-@Valenciennes1861; -@Valenciennes1861a]
description of *Ichthyosaurus cuvieri* and *Ichthyosaurus normanniae*
[figured in @Lennier1870 pl. 6], @Sauvage1874 [p. 84, footnote 1]
suggested that these taxa may be synonymous with *Ichthyosaurus
trigonus* and *Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus* respectively.
@Lydekker1889 [pp 22--23] agreed with this, but put forward that the
specimen of *Ichthyosaurus normanniae* described by @Valenciennes1861a
was the same individual as *Ichthyosaurus cuvieri* described earlier
[@Valenciennes1861]. Lydekker therefore tentatively included all three
species under *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*. Subsequently, @Sauvage1888
[@Sauvage1894; @Sauvage1902; @Sauvage1902a; @Sauvage1902b; @Sauvage1902c]
was toing and froing with the synonymy of *Ichthyosaurus cuvieri* and
*Ichthyosaurus trigonus*, but finally retained them as distinct species
[@Sauvage1911]. Meanwhile, he referred *Ichthyosaurus cuvieri* to
*Ophthalmosaurus cuvieri* [Valenciennes, -@Valenciennes1861]
[@Sauvage1894]. The type specimens of *Ichthyosaurus cuvieri* and
*Ichthyosaurus normanniae* were destroyed in World War II, but casts of
the material remain in the Musée National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris
[@Bardet1997; @McGowan2003].

Most of the specimens referred to *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* are vertebrae
that show no differing characteristics from other Middle to Late
Jurassic ichthyosaurs. The characters detailed by previous authors are
largely attributable to individual variation or related to the position
in the vertebral column [@Lydekker1889; @Sauvage1911; @Delair1959]. More
substantial material, such as the partial forelimb described by
@Sauvage1911 indicates the presence of another taxon of ichthyosaur in
the Upper Jurassic of the United Kingdom and France, besides
*Brachypterygius* and *Nannopterygius*. The morphological affinity
between this and several other specimens referred to *Ichthyosaurus
trigonus* may allow erection of a new species of ichthyosaur. In this
monograph, we have separated this material as *Macropterygius* sp. (see
[1.5.1.6](#Macropterygiusspindet){reference-type="ref"
reference="Macropterygiusspindet"}).

#### Genus OPHTHALMOSAURUS [Seeley, -@Seeley1874] {#genus-ophthalmosaurus-seeley}

[\[Omonocharactus\]]{#Omonocharactus label="Omonocharactus"}

rlp13cm \* & [-@Appleby1956] & *Ophthalmosaurus monocharactus* Appleby;
p. 444 \[Oxford Clay Formation (Callovian Stage), Peterborough,
Cambridgeshire, UK\].\
& [-@Appleby1958] & *Ophthalmosaurus monocharactus* Appleby; pp 9--10,
35.\
& *[-@Mazin1982]* & *Ophtalmosaurus* \[*sic.*\] *monocharactus* Appleby;
Mazin, p. 97 \[authority given as Appleby, 1965 (*sic.*)\].\
\[ & [-@Kirton1983] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Kirton, pp 11,
138 \[senior subjective synonym\].\]\
*non* & [-@Gasparini1988] & *Ophthalmosaurus monocharactus* Appleby;
Gasparini, p. 3 \[Vaca Muerta Formation, Cantera El Ministerio,
Argentina (38° 49' S, 70° 12' E)\].\
& *[-@Martill1991a]* & *Ophthalmosaurus monocharactus* Appleby; Martill,
p. 229.\
& [-@McGowan2003] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; McGowan & Motani,
p. 113 \[senior subjective synonym\].

Junior subjective synonym of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.

@Appleby1956 [444] assigned PETMG R220 (formerly part of P.8;
[@Appleby1956; @Appleby1958]) as the holotype specimen
([\[pl39,pl40\]](#pl39,pl40){reference-type="ref"
reference="pl39,pl40"}).

See the taxonomic discussion of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[OicenicusDiscussion\]](#OicenicusDiscussion){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusDiscussion"}).

[\[Opleydelli\]]{#Opleydelli label="Opleydelli"}

rlp13cm \* & [-@Lydekker1890] & *Ophthalmosaurus pleydelli* Lydekker;
p. 268, fig. 63 \[Kimmeridge Clay Formation (Kimmeridgian Stage),
Gillingham, Dorset, UK\].\
& [-@Mansel-Pleydell1890] & *Ophthalmosaurus pleydelli* Lydekker;
Mansel-Pleydell, p. 14, figs 3, 4.\
& *[-@Delair1959]* & *Ophthalmosaurus pleydelli* Lydekker; Delair,
p. 67.\
\[ & [-@Kirton1983] & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; Kirton, p. 14
\[senior subjective synonym\].\]\
& *[-@McGowan2003]* & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* Seeley; McGowan &
Motani, p. 113 \[senior subjective synonym\].

Junior subjective synonym of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.

@Lydekker1890 [269] allocated a humerus (DORCM G.82) and anterior
presacral vertebral centrum from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation of
Gillingham, Dorset, United Kingdom; NHMUK PV R1712 and R1712a are casts
of these. @Lydekker1890 [269] also suggested that NHMUK PV 46491, 46473,
46407, 47885, and 46474 may be referable to this species. The holotype
was described by @Mansel-Pleydell1890.

See the taxonomic discussion of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[OicenicusDiscussion\]](#OicenicusDiscussion){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusDiscussion"}).

Osteological Comparisons {#OsteologicalComparisons}
------------------------

The valid taxa described above -- *Brachypterygius extremus,
Ophthalmosaurus icenicus, Nannopterygius enthekiodon,* and
Ophthalmosauridae indet. -- are compared to other relevant ichthyosaur
taxa below. Most extensive comparisons are made with members of
Ophthalmosauridae, with which the above taxa share the greatest
affinity, and other relevant and well known ichthyosaur taxa,
particularly *Ichthyosaurus communis*. Further, more brief comparisons
are made with more basal taxa as exemplars of various ichthyosaur
'grades' [after @Motani2005]: e.g. the basal grade **Grippia
longirostris*,* and intermediate grade *Cymbospondylus, *Mixosaurus,**
and *Shastasaurus*. Comparisons are made to highlight morphological
differences between taxa, as are detailed between the taxa described
above, but with a focus on characters used in recent phylogenetic
analyses.

### *Acamptonectes densus* [Fischer *et al.*, -@Fischer2012] {#tax:comp:Adensus}

*Acamptonectes* is represented by a single valid species: *Acamptonectes
densus* [Fischer *et al.*, -@Fischer2012] from the Speeton Clay
Formation (Hauterivian) of North Yorkshire, United Kingdom, and Lower
Saxony, Germany. *Acamptonectes densus* is recovered within a
paraphyletic *Ophthalmosaurus* (sister to *Ophthalmosaurus natans*) by
@Fischer2012 [@Fischer2013a], so is one of the closest relatives to
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. This taxon is represented by few remains
that poorly preserve much of the body, but its similarity to
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* warrants discussion.

The anterior portion of the skull in *Acamptonectes densus* is
disarticulated and incomplete [@Fischer2012]. The quadrate condyle of
*Acamptonectes densus* is angled more medially and extends farther
dorsally on the quadrate than in either *Brachypterygius extremus* or
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* a trait shared with some species of
*Platypterygius* and Ophthalmosaurinae
indet. [@Kolb2009; @Adams2011; @Fischer2012; @Druckenmiller2014]. The
basipterygoid processes of *Acamptonectes densus* are much larger than
in either *Brachypterygius extremus* or *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,*
although they are not as clearly separated from the main body of the
basisphenoid as in *Brachypterygius extremus*
([\[fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl28\]](#fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl28){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl28"}, figs 1--4,
[\[pl29\]](#pl29){reference-type="ref" reference="pl29"}, figs 1--4).
Similarly, the dorsal basisphenoid of *Acamptonectes densus* is
developed into a medial sagittally-aligned crest that is autapomorphic.
The membranous labyrinth is particularly well defined on the posterior
surface of the prootic of *Acamptonectes densus*: the impression of the
horizontal semicircular canal extends to the lateral margin, without the
cartilage-covered border found in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.
Additionally, a rounded process extends medially from the dorsomedial
margin that is interpreted as origin of the *M. adductor mandibulae
externus* [@Fischer2012], which is reduced in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
to an anterior ridge ventrally
([\[fig:Oicenicus-prootic,pl08\]](#fig:Oicenicus-prootic,pl08){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-prootic,pl08"}, figs 1, 2). The extracondylar
area of the basioccipital in *Acamptonectes densus* is narrower than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and shares small ventral tubers separated by
a notch. However, the extracondylar area not as reduced as in
*Brachypterygius extremus,* which does not share that ventral notch.
Further, the floor of the *foramen magnum* in *Acamptonectes densus* is
divided sagittally by a low ridge not found in any other taxon. The
medial shaft of the stapes of *Acamptonectes densus* is more slender
than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* and the medial head is cubic in
shape *Acamptonectes densus* (an autapomorphy; [@Fischer2012]) rather
than the more rounded, bulbous form in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.
*Acamptonectes densus* shows variability in the processes anterior to
the jaw articulation on the surangular: the paracoronoid process is
always present, but the preglenoid process is not always present
[@Fischer2012].

The margins of the anterior and posterior faces of the centra in
*Acamptonectes densus* bulge slightly, interlocking between centra to
form a stiff axis [@Fischer2012]. There are no grooves on the anterior
or posterior faces of the ribs in *Acamptonectes densus*, whereas there
are in *Brachypterygius extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* so the
rib has a rounded cross-section [@Fischer2012]. This is similar to the
distal rib portions in *Nannopterygius enthekiodon,* although this taxon
has a median groove proximally. Proximally, the scapula of
*Acamptonectes densus* is broader than in *Brachypterygius extremus*
([\[pl32\]](#pl32){reference-type="ref" reference="pl32"}, figs 14, 15),
with the strong development of the acromion process found in some
specimens of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The humerus of *Acamptonectes
densus* shares the distal facet configuration of *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* (articulating with the anterior accessory element, radius, and
ulna). Unlike in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* the anteriormost facet is
crescentic in *Acamptonectes densus,* so that the anterodistal margin of
the humerus is rounded rather than angled
([\[fig:Oicenicus-forelimb,pl23\]](#fig:Oicenicus-forelimb,pl23){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-forelimb,pl23"}, fig. 6). As in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* and unlike most other neoichthyosaurians,
the posterior margin of the ulna in *Acamptonectes densus* is concave
and edgy, rather than being almost as thick of the rest of the element
[@Fischer2012 character 36]. Furthermore, the ulna in *Acamptonectes
densus* has a small posterior facet distally that is than found in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[fig:Oicenicus-flimbdor\]](#fig:Oicenicus-flimbdor){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-flimbdor"}), but is much smaller than the facet
for the post-axial accessory element in *Brachypterygius extremus*
([\[fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33\]](#fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-forelimb,pl33"}, fig. 4).

### *Aegirosaurus leptospondylus* [Wagner, -@Wagner1853] {#tax:comp:Aleptospondylus}

*Aegirosaurus leptospondylus* [Wagner, -@Wagner1853] is known from the
Solnhofen Formation (Tithonian) of Bavaria, Germany. Originally
described as *Ichthyosaurus leptospondylus* [Wagner, -@Wagner1853], the
genus *Aegirosaurus* was erected by @Bardet2000. Recent phylogenetic
analyses have placed *Aegirosaurus leptospondylus* within
Platypterygiinae, as sister to *Sveltonectes insolitus* and close to
*Brachypterygius extremus*
[@Fischer2012; @Fischer2013a; @Roberts2014; @Arkhangelsky2014].

The maxilla in *Aegirosaurus leptospondylus* has much less extensive
lateral exposure than in *Brachypterygius extremus* as the jugal does
not extend so far anterior as in the latter species, restricting this,
which is more similar to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-body"}). However,
the contact between the premaxilla and lachrymal is more extensive in
*Aegirosaurus leptospondylus* than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,*
similar to *Brachypterygius extremus,* so that the maxilla is clearly
separated from the external naris. The postorbital region is narrower in
*Aegirosaurus leptospondylus* than in CAMSM J68516
([1.29](#fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull"}), and more similar to
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* as the postorbital covers much of the
quadratojugal: there is greater exposure of the quadratojugal in
*Brachypterygius extremus*. In *Aegirosaurus leptospondylus,* the snout
is not as robust as in *Brachypterygius extremus,* and the dentition is
reduced, as is found in both *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* and
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The neotype specimen SM of *Aegirosaurus
leptospondylus* does have a more elongate snout than any of the
ichthyosaurs described above, but the development of this appears to be
variable [@Bardet2000].

Unlike in both *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* and *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus,* the posterior presacral--anterior caudal vertebrae of
*Aegirosaurus leptospondylus* do not increase in height in this region.
Additionally, @Bardet2000 [507] describe posteriorly recurved neural
arches in the presacral region, with large neural canals. In
*Aegirosaurus leptospondylus,* the humerus has a similar configuration
of humeral facets to *Brachypterygius extremus* (articulating with the
radius, intermedium, and ulna respectively). Distally, the humerus of
*Aegirosaurus leptospondylus* is not expanded so far anteroposteriorly
as in *Brachypterygius extremus* or *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*: the
proximal and distal widths are subequal in *Aegirosaurus
leptospondylus*. The forelimbs of *Aegirosaurus leptospondylus* contain
many more elements than have been found for *Brachypterygius extremus,
Nannopterygius enthekiodon,* or *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*: up to 20 in
a single digit, whereas the maximum known for the other taxa are 16,
four, and nine respectively. Similarly, the post-axial digits of both
*Aegirosaurus leptospondylus* and *Brachypterygius extremus* are
important and better developed than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.

### *Arthropterygius* [Maxwell, -@Maxwell2010] {#tax:comp:Arthropterygius}

*Ophthalmosaurus chrisorum* [Russell, -@Russell1993] was described from
the Ringnes Formation (Oxfordian--Kimmeridgian) of Melville Island,
Northwest Territories, Canada; this material was later assigned to the
new taxon *Arthropterygius* [Maxwell, -@Maxwell2010] (see
[\[OphthalmosaurusDiscussion\]](#OphthalmosaurusDiscussion){reference-type="ref"
reference="OphthalmosaurusDiscussion"}). The material referred to this
taxon includes basicranial, vertebral, pectoral and forelimb, and pelvic
and hindlimb elements [@Maxwell2010]. Additional material has been
referred to *Arthropterygius* sp. by @Fernandez2012 from the Vaca Muerta
Formation (Tithonian) of Neuquén Province, Argentina, and by
@Zverkov2015 from the Paromes Formation (Tithonian) of Sosnogorsk
District, Komi Republic, Russia, which will also be considered here.
*Arthropterygius chrisorum* is typically found as the most basal member
of Ophthalmosauridae following Fischer *et al.*'s [-@Fischer2011c 1020]
definition
[@Fischer2012; @Fischer2013a; @Roberts2014; @Arkhangelsky2014], but has
been recovered in a more derived position within Ophthalmosauridae
[@Maxwell2010; @Druckenmiller2010].

The basisphenoid of *Arthropterygius* has a similar morphology to
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. Like in *Brachypterygius extremus,* the
ventral entrance of the internal carotid foramen is positioned more
posteriorly in *Arthropterygius* than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* but
in *Arthropterygius,* this foramen is positioned further posteriorly in
the posteriormost face of the basisphenoid with a recessed area ventral
to the passage of the foramen on the ventral surface that is not found
in the taxa described above. The basipterygoid processes are not so well
differentiated from the main body of the basisphenoid in
*Arthropterygius* as in either *Brachypterygius extremus* or
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* although posteriorly they are demarcated by
a groove for the facial (VII) nerve [@Maxwell2010]. Anteriorly, the
basioccipital of *Arthropterygius* has a raised, square boss for
articulation with the basisphenoid that is similar to *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus,* although more clearly offset from the main body of the
basioccipital, but not found in *Brachypterygius extremus*. Like in both
*Brachypterygius extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* some
specimens of *Arthropterygius* preserve a well defined notochordal pit
dorsally on the anterior face. In posterior view, the extracondylar area
of the basioccipital in *Arthropterygius* is not exposed so prominently
as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* but is more extensive than in
*Brachypterygius extremus*.

The pectoral elements of *Arthropterygius* show great similarity to
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [@Maxwell2010]. The humerus of
*Arthropterygius* is differentiated from both *Brachypterygius extremus*
and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* by the relatively smaller dorsal and
ventral processes proximally; the ventral process is particularly poorly
developed relative to more derived ophthalmosaurids. Distally, the
humeral facets of *Arthropterygius* match the configuration of
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* however, the ulnar facet is not so greatly
deflected posteriorly in *Arthropterygius* and has a pronounced ventral
torsion. The manual pre-axial accessory element in *Arthropterygius* is
rounded rather than teardrop-shaped as it is in *Brachypterygius
extremus*. Similar to the humerus, the dorsal and ventral processes on
the femur of *Arthropterygius* are poorly demarcated from the main body
and not so well developed compared to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* and
distally, the tibial facet is much larger than the fibular facet in
*Arthropterygius*.

### *Athabascasaurus bitumineus* [Druckenmiller & Maxwell, -@Druckenmiller2010] {#tax:comp:Abitumineus}

*Athabascasaurus bitumineus* [Druckenmiller & Maxwell,
-@Druckenmiller2010] is known from a single specimen from the Wabiskaw
Member of the Clearwater Formation (Albian) of a locality \~35 km north
of Fort Murray, Alberta, Canada. The specimen is preserved in dorsal
view, and much of the girdles, limbs, anterior snout, and the end of the
tail are either not easily visible or missing [@Druckenmiller2010].
Because of this, *Athabascasaurus bitumineus* has been difficult to
place phylogenetically, and has been resolved within Platypterygiinae as
sister to *Platypterygius australis*
[@Fischer2012; @Fischer2014b; @Arkhangelsky2014], within
Ophthalmosaurinae as sister a Svalbard ichthyosaur-containing clade
[@Roberts2014], or within a ladderised Ophthalmosauridae that is
approximately equal to a paraphyletic Ophthalmosaurinae
[@Druckenmiller2010].

In *Athabascasaurus bitumineus*, the premaxilla reaches posteriorly to
form part of the margin of the external naris as is found in other
ichthyosaurs; this is interpreted from the premaxillary facets on the
maxilla [@Druckenmiller2010 fig. 6]. The pineal foramen of
*Athabascasaurus bitumineus* is anteroposteriorly elongate, and only
surrounded anteriorly by the frontals, the posterior portion being
bordered by the parietals; in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* the frontals
surround almost the entirety of the smaller pineal foramen.
Additionally, the frontals of *Athabascasaurus bitumineus* have a
smaller exposure dorsally than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* excluded
mostly by what is likely a medial extension of the postfrontal. The
squamosal of *Athabascasaurus bitumineus* is square, similar to
*Caypullisaurus bonapartei* [@Fernandez2007], not triangular as found in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* ([\[pl04\]](#pl04){reference-type="ref"
reference="pl04"}, figs 1,2). Like in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* the
atlas and axis of *Athabascasaurus bitumineus* are fused, but do not
have a clear suture line along this fusion; the diapophyses and
parapophyses are fused on the atlas-axis. The ilium of *Athabascasaurus
bitumineus* is strongly posteriorly curved proximally, more than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* and the ischiopubis of the former taxon does
not possess an obturator foramen, nor partly defined suture line seen in
the latter taxon.

### Basal grade ichthyosaurs {#tax:comp:basalgrade}

The earliest and phylogenetically most basal Ichthyosauriformes together
form a basal grade of ichthyosaur [*sensu* @Motani2005] that together
share many characteristics that differ from more derived taxa. This
grade typically includes the Early Triassic taxa *Cartorhynchus
lenticarpus* [Motani *et al.*, -@Motani2014a], three species of
*Chaohusaurus* [Young & Dong, -@Young1972], *Grippia longirostris*
[Wiman, -@Wiman1929], *Gulosaurus helmi* [Cuthbertson *et al.*,
-@Cuthbertson2013a], *Parvinatator wapitiensis* [Nicholls & Brinkman,
-@Nicholls1995], and *Utatsusaurus hataii* [Shikama *et al.*,
-@Shikama1978]. As these taxa are neither phylogenetically nor
temporally close to the taxa described above, only brief comparisons of
the most important differences will be made.

Unlike in *Brachypterygius extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* the
external naris in the earliest Ichthyosauriformes has a greater dorsal
exposure, as in *Utatsusaurus hataii* and *Grippia longirostris*
[@Shikama1978; @Motani1998a; @Motani2000]. The prefrontal has a greater
dorsal exposure in more basal ichthyosaurs than in the ophthalmosaurids
described above, and the frontal contributes to the margin of the orbit
laterally, separating the prefrontal and postfrontal
[@Motani1998a; @Motani2000; @Maisch2001a]. The frontal also has a larger
dorsal exposure in basal grade ichthyosaurs than in *Brachypterygius
extremus* or *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* but the frontal does not
contribute to the supratemporal fenestra and is excluded by the
postfrontal, similar to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
[[\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor"};
@Wiman1929; @Mazin1981; @Motani1998a; @Motani2000]. In the earliest
ichthyosaurs (e.g. *Utatsusaurus hataii* and *Grippia longirostris*),
the bones bordering the fenestra are (left fenestra, clockwise from
anterior): parietal, supratemporal, squamosal (in *Utatsusaurus hataii*
only), postorbital and postfrontal [@Motani1998a; @Motani2000; although
see @Cuthbertson2013]. In these ichthyosaurs, the fenestra is typically
wider than long, and may be pinched towards the anterior and/or
posterior. Although their interpretation of the temporal series was
different, Nicholls & Brinkman's [-@Nicholls1995] description of
*Parvinatator wapitiensis* shows that the squamosal (if the more
traditional interpretation is followed) would have also been excluded
from the supratemporal opening. *Utatsusaurus hataii* shows some fusion
of the sutures in the skull, particularly between the dentary and
surangular; this is greater in adult specimens than juveniles and
therefore may be ontogenetic [@McGowan2003; @Cuthbertson2013]. The most
basal ichthyosaurs show a rather small splint of the angular in lateral
view [@Motani1998a; @Cuthbertson2013; @Cuthbertson2013a]; much of the
height of the posterior mandible is formed by the surangular rather than
subequal contributions from the surangular and angular in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. While all neoichthyosaurians, and most Upper
Triassic ichthyosaurs, have the characteristic aulacodont tooth
attachment [@Edmund1960], the most basal ichthyosaurs have slightly
different forms: both *Utatsusaurus hataii* and *Grippia longirostris*
have subthecodont dentitions [@Mazin1983; @Motani1997a].

In the earliest ichthyosaurs, *Utatsusaurus hataii, Chaohusaurus
geishanensis* [Young & Dong, -@Young1972], and *Grippia longirostris,* a
distinct sacral region is present. Here, two ribs are modified with a
broad distal articular surface to form a direct connection to the pelvic
girdle [@Wiman1933; @Shikama1978; @Chen1985]. The more basal
ichthyopterygians have a broad and fan-like scapula dorsally, with the
glenoid articulation offset. This is best seen in *Grippia longirostris*
and the mixosaurids *Mixosaurus cornalianus* and *Phalarodon atavus*
[@Repossi1902; @Wiman1912; @Wiman1929; @Mazin1981; @Nicholls1999; @Liu2013].
In these taxa, the anterior margin of the humerus is drawn out
anteriorly into a large flange, which hides the contours of the humeral
shaft [@Motani1998; @Motani1998b; @McGowan2003]. The distal manual and
pedal elements of basal grade ichthyosaurs are elongate and retain
evidence of a demarcated shaft, although these elements are shorter
compared to inferred terrestrial ancestors, such as *Petrolacosaurus*
[Reisz, -@Reisz1977]
[@Shikama1978; @Reisz1981; @Mazin1986; @Motani1998; @Motani1998b; @Motani1999].
*Chaohusaurus chaoxianensis* [Chen, -@Chen1985] exhibits delayed
ossification of the carpals, even in adult specimens, and so many
specimens have only tiny ossified elements in this region
[@Motani1998c; @Motani2014; @Motani2015]; more distal elements are
ossified normally. Basal ichthyosaurs and mixosaurid ichthyosaurs retain
distal carpal one and the first digit, and distal carpal five, which are
lost in later ichthyosaurs [@Merriam1905; @Motani1999]. Basal
ichthyosaurs have a larger and better developed pelvic girdle than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* without fusion between the ischium and pubis
[@Mazin1981; @Motani1998a]. Basal ichthyosaurs, particularly *Grippia
longirostris* and *Utatsusaurus hataii,* have proximodistally elongate
femora with terminal facets for articulation with the hindlimb
epipodials. Proximally, these elements do not have the well-developed
dorsal and ventral processes of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
[@Wiman1933; @Shikama1978].

### Basal merriamosaurians {#tax:comp:basalmerriamosaurians}

This grouping of non-neoichthyosaurian merriamosaurians [*sensu*
@Motani1999c; @Motani2014a] includes several taxa that can be informally
termed 'shastasaur-grade', forming the more derived portion of Motani's
[-@Motani2005] intermediate grade: they represent most late Middle--Late
Triassic taxa, and share similarities in their cranial and forelimb
osteology. Taxa within this group include *Besanosaurus leptorhynchus*
[Dal Sasso & Pinna, -@DalSasso1996], *Californosaurus perrini* [Merriam,
-@Merriam1902], *Callawayia neoscapularis* [McGowan, -@McGowan1994a],
*Guanlingsaurus liangae* Yin in [Yin *et al.*, -@Yin2000],
*Guizhouichthyosaurus* Cao & Luo in [Yin *et al.*, -@Yin2000],
*Qianichthyosaurus* [Li, -@Li1999], *Shastasaurus* [Merriam,
-@Merriam1895], *Shonisaurus popularis* [Camp, -@Camp1976], and
*Toretocnemus* [Merriam, -@Merriam1903].

In *Guanlingsaurus liangae,* the nasals extend forward right to the tip
of the snout and enclose an elongate internasal foramen between them;
this is not seen in any other ichthyosaur [@Sander2011]. An unusual
supranarial crest is seen in *Qianichthyosaurus zhoui* [Li, -@Li1999]
that extends mediolaterally on the external surface of the nasal
[@Nicholls2003; @Maisch2008]. @Maisch2008 suggested a relationship
between this and the anterior terrace of the supratemporal fenestra, but
questioned this as there is no development of a sagittal ridge.
Posterior to this, the unusual shortness of the posterior nasals in
*Qianichthyosaurus zhoui,* *Qianichthyosaurus xingyiensis* Ji, Jiang &
Motani in [Yang *et al.*, -@Yang2013], and the mixosaurid *Phalarodon
atavus,* among others, allows for an extensive contact between the
lateral frontal and prefrontal [@Maisch2008; @Liu2013; @Yang2013]. The
parietal in *Shonisaurus popularis* has a simpler, straighter form than
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and *Brachypterygius extremus,* without the
posterolateral deflection of the supratemporal process [@Camp1980
pp 152--153, fig. 4]. The parietal also has a much greater contribution
to the pineal foramen in *Shonisaurus popularis* than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. *Shonisaurus popularis* and *Cymbospondylus
petrinus,* along with the mixosaurids *Phalarodon atavus* and
*Mixosaurus cornalianus,* show the strong development of a high sagittal
crest that runs along the midline of the parietals, frontals and nasals
[@Huene1949a; @Motani1999b; @Maisch2000b]. This marks the medial margin
of the anterior terrace of the supratemporal fenestra in which the
parietal has a large part [@Motani1999c fig. 3]. *Callawayia
neoscapularis* has a narrow supratemporal fenestra, pinched anteriorly
and posteriorly [@Nicholls2001]; the postfrontal is excluded laterally
and the frontal makes up most of the anteromedial border. A longer and
curved postorbital, similar to that found in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,*
is seen in *Shastasaurus alexandrae, Macgowania janiceps* [McGowan,
-@McGowan1996], and *Callawayia neoscapularis* from the Late Triassic,
as well as possibly in *Hudsonelpidia brevirostris* [McGowan,
-@McGowan1995] [@Merriam1902; @Maisch2000a; @Nicholls2001]. These taxa,
along with *Ichthyosaurus communis,* show only the crescentic
postorbital rim, and not the posterior lamella found in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*.

The palatine of *Shonisaurus popularis* shows broad, fan-like structures
dorsally that @Camp1980 suggested were suture lines for the maxilla; the
contact between the two may be more complex than the simple overlap seen
in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The supraoccipital is only a minor
participant in the *foramen magnum* in many Triassic ichthyosaurs, such
as *Guizhouichthyosaurus tangae* Cao & Luo in [Yin *et al.*, -@Yin2000]
and *Cymbospondylus petrinus* [@Merriam1908; @Maisch2004a; @Shang2012],
but is more important in *Brachypterygius extremus* and
*Ophthalmosaurus* (see
[\[synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon\]](#synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon){reference-type="ref"
reference="synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon"}). @Nicholls2001 [987]
described the exoccipital of *Callawayia neoscapularis* as higher and
narrower than found in *Ichthyosaurus* and *Ophthalmosaurus*. The stapes
in *Shonisaurus popularis* is rather different from that of
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* being composed of a massive, flattened
footplate that abutted against the lateral face of the basioccipital and
a much more slender distal portion that extended towards the quadrate
[@Camp1980]. This is also the case in the related taxa
*Guizhouichthyosaurus tangae* and *Besanosaurus leptorhynchus*
[@DalSasso1996; @Shang2012].

The dentary in *Guanlingsaurus liangae,* along with the premaxilla and
maxilla, does not have an alveolar groove, supporting the view that this
taxon, and the genus more generally, was edentulous
[@Maisch2000a; @Sander2011]. The splenial of *Qianichthyosaurus zhoui*
does not cover as large a part of the medial mandibular surface as in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [@Maisch2008]; it may also not partake in the
mandibular symphysis. *Guanlingsaurus liangae,* compared to other
shastasaurid-grade ichthyosaurs, shows a high angular exposure
posteriorly [@Sander2011; @Ji2013], whereas in *Guizhouichthyosaurus
tangae* and *Shastasaurus alexandrae,* the exposure of the angular is
restricted to a narrow ventral exposure ventral to the surangular in
lateral view [@Merriam1902; @Maisch2000a; @Maisch2006c].
*Qianichthyosaurus zhoui* has a distinctly upturned posterior mandible,
formed largely by the surangular with a relatively larger spacing
between the jaw articulation and fossa surangularis and dentary contact
[@Maisch2008]. The paracoronoid process in this taxon is low, whereas
the preglenoid process is drawn sharply up into a high process. The
ceratobranchials of *Shastasaurus sikkaniensis* [Nicholls & Manabe,
-@Nicholls2004] are very long and large compared to other ichthyosaurs
and are placed ventromedially [@Nicholls2004]. This led @Sander2011 to
suggest that this taxon, and the related *Shonisaurus popularis* and
*Guanlingsaurus liangae,* were capable of suction feeding, similar to
beaked whales (Ziphiidae: [@Rommel2006]). @Ji2013 disputed this based
upon the small size of the hyoids in a juvenile specimen of
*Guanlingsaurus liangae,* but the hyoids in *Tursiops* are of a similar
size, although much more robust [@Rommel2006]. The reappraisal by
@Motani2013 found that ossification of a hyoid corpus is lacking in all
ichthyosaurs apart from *Hauffiopteryx typicus* [@Maisch1998c], an
important part in the function of suction feeding.

Unlike in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* the parapophysis in 'shastasaur
grade' taxa is not retained throughout the presacral column, but instead
this facet is reduced posteriorly and lost posterior to centra 7--15,
depending on the species [@Merriam1908; @Sander1989]; the rib
articulates with this single facet. In *Besanosaurus leptorhynchus* and
*Shonisaurus popularis,* the coracoid is fan-like medially, with a large
intercoracoidal facet, but laterally is narrowed into a shaft that
separates the medial fan from the expanded glenoid and scapular facets
[@Camp1980; @DalSasso1996; @McGowan1999]. The humeri in *Shastasaurus*
and *Shonisaurus* are modified to robust and broad, square elements by
the expansion of this humeral diaphysis [@Merriam1908; @Camp1980].

Notching of the anterior margin of the radiale and distal carpal two is
found in *Macgowania janiceps, Callawayia neoscapularis,* and all adult
specimens referred to *Stenopterygius quadriscissus*
[@McGowan1979; @McGowan1996; @Nicholls2001; @Maisch2008b; @Maxwell2014].
This is taken further in *Hauffiopteryx typicus, Callawayia
neoscapularis,* and *Toretocnemus zitteli* [Merriam, -@Merriam1903] so
that the space between the radius and ulna is reduced to a foramen
formed by two notches in their posterior and anterior margins
respectively [@Merriam1903; @Sander1989; @McGowan1994a; @Nicholls2001].
Several taxa possess notches in the anterior, posterior or both humeral
margins, similar to those seen on more distal elements (see below).
@Motani1999c interpreted these notches as the remnants of the true
humeral shaft that had been modified by the shortening of the humerus.
The first metacarpal does not ossify in the clade Merriamosauria
[*sensu* @Motani1999c], resulting in the loss of the first digit distal
to this. This is shown in *Besanosaurus leptorhynchus, Toretocnemus
zitteli,* and Euichthyosauria [@Merriam1903; @DalSasso1996]. There is
further reduction of the number of digits in the Shastasaurinae [*sensu*
@Motani1999c] to three with the loss of the second metacarpal and
supported digit [@Camp1980]. The fifth digit in *Toretocnemus zitteli*
also appears to be lost, or greatly reduced [@Merriam1903]. In
*Shonisaurus popularis,* the intermedium has been greatly reduced, or
may not have been ossified [@Camp1980]. The carpals are largely rounded
in these Late Triassic ichthyosaurs, as in *Callawayia neoscapularis*
[@Nicholls2001], but are polygonal and more closely articulated in
post-Triassic taxa. Both the radiale and ulnare in *Shonisaurus
popularis* may be notched marginally [@Camp1980]. The notches in these
elements appear similar to marginal foramina: they are almost entirely
enclosed by the radiale or ulnare. In *Shonisaurus popularis,* the
phalanges are broad and rounded elements, closely packed, but with
poorly defined facets for articulation with neighbouring elements
[@Camp1980].

In *Californosaurus perrini,* the proximal ilium has a well-developed,
anteriorly-directed process, likely for the attachment of muscles to the
hindlimb, that becomes narrower distally. A similar structure is seen in
*Suevoleviathan disinteger* and to a lesser extent in *Hudsonelpidia
brevirostris* [@McGowan1995; @Maisch1998]. In *Besanosaurus
leptorhynchus, Shastasaurus pacificus,* and *Californosaurus perrini,*
the obturator foramen between the ischium and pubis is open, forming a
notch on the posterior margin of the pubis
[@Merriam1902; @DalSasso1996]. This distal notch becomes fully enclosed
in the basal parvipelvians *Hudsonelpidia brevirostris* and *Macgowania
janiceps* by the proximal and distal contact of the pubis and ischium,
although they are not fused [@McGowan1995; @McGowan1996]. *Callawayia
neoscapularis* has a femur with a similar form to *Toretocnemus
californicus* [Merriam, -@Merriam1903], with well-developed dorsal and
ventral processes; particularly the dorsal process is developed into a
prominent longitudinal ridge [@Merriam1903; @Nicholls2001]. A notch in
the anterior margin is present on the tibia of some Triassic taxa, such
as *Callawayia neoscapularis* and *Qianichthyosaurus zhoui,* although in
the latter taxon this is only partially formed
[@Nicholls2001; @Nicholls2003]. The femur of *Toretocnemus californicus*
is much wider distally than in the anterior portion, creating an
elongate distal blade for articulation with two epipodials
[@Merriam1903]. *Qianichthyosaurus zhoui* and *Toretocnemus
californicus* have shorter, more polygonal distal hindlimb elements,
although marginal elements may be notched; these two taxa have notches
on both the anterior and posterior marginal distal hindlimb elements
[@Merriam1903; @Nicholls2003].

### *Cryopterygius kristiansenae* [Druckenmiller *et al.*, -@Druckenmiller2012a] {#tax:comp:Ckristiansenae}

*Cryopterygius kristiansenae* [Druckenmiller *et al.*,
-@Druckenmiller2012a] is known from a single specimen from the
Sløttsmoya Member of the Agardhfjellet Formation (Tithonian) of
Spitzbergen, Svalbard; the specimen in largely complete and preserved in
lateral view. @Roberts2014 found this taxon to be within
Ophthalmosaurinae in a Svalbard ichthyosaur-polytomy, while
@Arkhangelsky2014 found *Cryopterygius kristiansenae* to be in a
polytomy within their Ophthalmosaurinae alongside *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus, Ophthalmosaurus natans, Acamptonectes densus, Undorosaurus
gorodischensis,* and *Paraophthalmosaurus*.

In *Cryopterygius kristiansenae,* the posterior margin of the lachrymal
is angled ventrally, creating a near 90° bend in the anterior margin of
the orbit, rather than the more continuous curve seen in the British
taxa described above. The postorbital exposure is anteroposteriorly
longer in *Cryopterygius kristiansenae* than in *Brachypterygius
extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* but this may be due in part to
disarticulation in this region; together the postorbital region is
longer than in *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* and *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus,* and more similar to *Brachypterygius extremus*. The presacral
region of *Cryopterygius kristiansenae* contains 52 vertebrae, more than
the 42 of *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* and 39--42 of *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus,* but this is determined based upon the position of the ilium
rather than the rib articulations in *Cryopterygius kristiansenae*.

The transverse bar of the intermedium in *Cryopterygius kristiansenae*
is longer than the median stem, which is strongly broadened distally,
becoming spatulate, which is not the case in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[fig:Oicenicus-pectoral,pl20\]](#fig:Oicenicus-pectoral,pl20){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-pectoral,pl20"}, fig. 1,2). The coracoid is
square posteriorly in *Cryopterygius kristiansenae* rather than the
rounded form of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* or the transversely-angled
posterior margin found in *Brachypterygius extremus* and *Nannopterygius
enthekiodon*. Unlike both *Brachypterygius extremus* and
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* the humerus of *Cryopterygius kristiansenae*
has only two distal facets, articulating with the radius and ulna. This
is similar to Ophthalmosauridae indet. described and discussed above
([1.5.1.6](#Macropterygiusspindet){reference-type="ref"
reference="Macropterygiusspindet"}), and *Nannopterygius enthekiodon,*
although the distal humeral facets in *Cryopterygius kristiansenae* are
approximately equal in size, whereas in the latter taxon the ulnar facet
appears to be larger. Distal to the humerus, the limb elements in
*Cryopterygius kristiansenae* are mostly polygonal, as in
*Brachypterygius extremus,* but are thickened like in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*. The ilium in *Cryopterygius kristiansenae* is broader
distally and flattened than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. Further, the
ischium is not fused distally to the pubis, so does not form an
obturator foramen, as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[fig:Oicenicus-pelvislat,fig:Oicenicus-pelvismed,pl25\]](#fig:Oicenicus-pelvislat,fig:Oicenicus-pelvismed,pl25){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-pelvislat,fig:Oicenicus-pelvismed,pl25"},
figs3--8).

### *Cymbospondylus* [Leidy, -@Leidy1868] {#tax:comp:Cymbospondylus}

The Middle Triassic genus *Cymbospondylus* [Leidy, -@Leidy1868] is
included in Motani's [-@Motani2005] intermediate grade. Three species
are included: *Cymbospondylus buchseri* [Sander, -@Sander1989],
*Cymbospondylus nichollsi* [Fröbisch *et al.*, -@Frobisch2006], and
*Cymbospondylus petrinus* [Leidy, -@Leidy1868]; the status of the type
species, *Cymbospondylus piscosus* [Leidy, -@Leidy1868] is currently
uncertain due to the non-diagnostic nature of the material
[@McGowan2003].

In *Cymbospondylus petrinus,* the maxilla receives much greater lateral
exposure than in the taxa described above, and forms a significant part
of the dental margin [@Merriam1908; @Maisch2004a]. The dorsal process of
the maxilla is also dorsally expanded, forming a long postnarial process
that excludes the lachrymal from the external naris in lateral view and
contacts the nasal dorsally. Interpretations of *Cymbospondylus
buchseri* and *Cymbospondylus nichollsi* agree that the postfrontal has
a comparatively limited dorsal and lateral exposure
[@Sander1989; @Frobisch2006]. This is different from the interpretation
of @Maisch2004a [fig. 1] for *Cymbospondylus petrinus,* which is similar
to the conclusions of @Merriam1908 and @Huene1916. The latter evaluation
gives the postfrontal a shape more similar to *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus,* but contact between the prefrontal and postorbital does not
allow the postfrontal to contribute to the dorsal rim of the orbit. In
their study of the skulls of *Cymbospondylus petrinus, Cymbospondylus
buchseri,* and *Cymbospondylus nichollsi,* @Frobisch2006 interpret the
posterior of the skull as possessing a postparietal that separates the
parietal from the supratemporal and forms much of the posterior and
medial border of the supratemporal fenestra. In this interpretation, the
supratemporal is reduced to a narrow splint of bone on the dorsolateral
margin of the skull roof [@Frobisch2006 fig. 11]. @Maisch2000c
[@Maisch2004a] instead interpret the skull of *Cymbospondylus petrinus*
as possessing an unpaired postparietal bone (= interparietal) between
the dorsal processes of the two parietals, and possibly contacting the
medial ramus of the supratemporal. *Cymbospondylus petrinus* and
*Cymbospondylus nichollsi* have near-triangular supratemporal fenestra,
narrowing posteriorly, with a small contribution from the frontal
anteriorly and exclusion of the postorbital laterally. The medial wall
is formed either by the parietal and supratemporal ([@Maisch2004a],
[after @Merriam1908]) or the postparietal [after @Frobisch2006].
*Cymbospondylus petrinus* has a large, quadrangular squamosal that forms
much of the dorsal cheek region rather than the smaller, triangular
squamosal of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [@Maisch2004a; @Frobisch2006].
The posterior portions of the vomers are visible in the holotype of
*Cymbospondylus nichollsi* [@Frobisch2006]. These are described as
"wing-like" (p. 524) and seem to show a wider posterior process than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*; the suture between this and the palate is
notched laterally. *Cymbospondylus petrinus* also has a distinct
posteromedial extension on each pterygoid that extends farther
posteroventrally to the basisphenoid than seen in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* [@Merriam1908]. The articular condyle of *Cymbospondylus
petrinus* is very different from *Brachypterygius extremus* and
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* as it is concave to receive the convex
anterior face of the atlas for the articulation between the skull and
vertebral column [@Merriam1908; @Maisch2004a]. @Maisch2004a [381] found
the stapes of *Cymbospondylus petrinus* to be a long, thin and dorsally
curved element that extends to a point high up on the quadrate. The
diapophysis retains contact with the neural arch facet in
*Cymbospondylus petrinus* and *Cymbospondylus buchseri* through to the
mid-presacral region, around vertebrae 36--38 rather than vertebrae
20--25 in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [@Merriam1908; @Sander1989].
Furthermore, this single facet narrows in the posterior presacral
vertebrae to form a forwards curving facet that connects the neural
arches and midpoint of the anterior face of the centrum. *Cymbospondylus
petrinus* has trapezoidal posterior presacral vertebral centra: wide
ventrally and narrowing dorsally [@Merriam1908]. Unlike in
neoichthyosaurians, the zygapophyses of *Cymbospondylus* and
*Mixosaurus* are separate
[@Theodori1843; @Fraas1891; @Merriam1902; @Huene1922b]. One of the most
distinct characteristics of the neural arches is the pairing of the
zygapophyses, particularly in the anterior presacral region, whereas the
zygapophyses are separate in *Mixosaurus cornalianus* and
*Cymbospondylus petrinus,* but are joined medially in all adequately
known neoichthyosaurians. The medial element in the gastralial basket of
*Cymbospondylus petrinus* has a medial process directed anteriorly
[@Merriam1908]. *Cymbospondylus buchseri* possesses a gastralial basket
with five elements: a medial element with two lateral elements on each
side [@Sander1989]. In *Cymbospondylus,* the clavicle has a broad dorsal
blade [@Merriam1908; @Frobisch2006]. The medial termination forms a
grooved, hat-like structure suggesting that the two clavicles did not
articulate with each other [@Frobisch2006]. *Cymbospondylus petrinus*
has a convergently similar scapula to post-Triassic ichthyosaurs: the
dorsal margin is emarginated forming a shaft distally [@Merriam1908].

### *Dearcmhara shawcrossi* [Brusatte *et al.*, -@Brusatte2015][\[tax:comp:Dshawcrossi\]]{#tax:comp:Dshawcrossi label="tax:comp:Dshawcrossi"} {#dearcmhara-shawcrossi-brusatte-et-al.taxcompdshawcrossi}

*Dearcmhara shawcrossi* [Brusatte *et al.*, -@Brusatte2015] is known
from associated partial distal humerus and three vertebrae likely from
the Bearreraig Sandstone Formation (late Toarcian--late Lower Bajocian).
Its recent description and the uncertainty of its dating means that it
was not included in the systematic palaeontology above (although see
[1.5.1.1](#tax:Neoichthyosauria){reference-type="ref"
reference="tax:Neoichthyosauria"}). It was assigned to the clade
Neoichthyosauria by @Brusatte2015 based upon a waisted humerus and
prominent anterodistal leading edge; the humerus resembles other
'leptonectid' ichthyosaurs, both Leptonectidae and *Temnodontosaurus*,
in this. Distally, humerus possesses two large facets, but unlike
*Nannopterygius enthekiodon*, has a small facet on the leading edge of
the anterodistal prominence, with the concavity of this being an
autapomorphy of *Dearcmhara shawcrossi*. The presence of a large
supraulnar process is found in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* as well as
*Dearcmhara shawcrossi*, but is variably developed in the former taxon.
Similarly, concavities in the dorsal and lateral profile of the ulnar
facet of *Dearcmhara shawcrossi* are also found in *Brachypterygius
extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.

### Leptonectidae [Maisch, -@Maisch1998] {#tax:comp:Leptonectidae}

The clade Leptonectidae [Maisch, -@Maisch1998] (last common ancestor of
*Eurhinosaurus longirostris* and *Leptonectes tenuirostris*) is united
by several features of the snout, postorbital skull, and limbs
[@Motani1999c; @Sander2000; @Maisch2000c]. This clade of Early Jurassic
ichthyosaurs is known from the Lias Group (Hettangian--Pliensbachian) of
the south-western United Kingdom, and the Posidonia Shale (Toarcian) of
south-western Germany [@Maisch2000c; @McGowan2003]. Within Leptonectidae
are typically: *Eurhinosaurus longirostris* [Mantell, -@Mantell1851],
*Excalibosaurus costini* [McGowan, -@McGowan1986], and three species of
*Leptonectes* [McGowan, -@McGowan1996a]. *Temnodontosaurus* was
recovered as the sister to Leptonectidae by @Fischer2013a, however,
Leptonectidae was recovered as paraphyletic by @Maxwell2012b.

One of the most compelling features of *Eurhinosaurus longirostris* is
the elongation of the premaxilla relative to the skull and lower jaw.
The premaxilla comprises around 77% of the length of the skull in
*Eurhinosaurus longirostris* and 68% in *Excalibosaurus costini*
[@McGowan1986], much greater than in *Brachypterygius extremus,
Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* or *Nannopterygius enthekiodon*. As the full
elongation that is characteristic of *Eurhinosaurus longirostris* and
*Excalibosaurus costini* is limited to the premaxilla, these taxa do not
show a corresponding elongation of the dentary [@McGowan1986]. Relative
shortening of the mandible is also found in *Leptonectes* and
*Temnodontosaurus,* but to a much lesser extent
[@Motani1999c; @Maisch2000c; @McGowan2003]. In *Leptonectes
tenuirostris* [Conybeare, -@Conybeare1822], the parietal ridge is well
developed and this is accompanied by a large parietal shelf posteriorly,
similar to *Stenopterygius triscissus,* but unlike in *Brachypterygius
extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
[@Owen1881; @Huene1922b; @Godefroit1993a; @Godefroit1995; @Maisch2003a].
Unlike other neoichthyosaurians, the supratemporal fenestra is greatly
reduced in size in the leptonectids *Eurhinosaurus longirostris,* to a
lesser degree in *Leptonectes tenuirostris*, but also in the
ecologically convergent *Hauffiopteryx typicus*
[@Huene1928; @Huene1951; @Maisch2003a; @Maisch2008b]. This is, at least
partially, a result of the anteroposterior shortening of the postorbital
region, which largely becomes posteriorly-directed in these taxa
[@Motani1999c]. The extent of the supratemporal in *Leptonectes*
cf. *tenuirostris* is similar to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* especially
the ventral ramus, which extends ventrally to the pterygoid in both
taxa, and has a clear protuberance that likely indicates a main area for
attachment of the *M. depressor mandibulae*
[[\[fig:Oicenicus-occpos,pl2\]](#fig:Oicenicus-occpos,pl2){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-occpos,pl2"}, fig. 6; @Maisch2003a fig. 4].
Unlike in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* there is no horizontal shelf
dorsal to the opisthotic facet on the supratemporal in *Leptonectes
tenuirostris* [@Maisch2003a]; this is also the case in *Ichthyosaurus
communis* and *Stenopterygius triscissus*
[@Owen1881; @McGowan1973; @Godefroit1994]. In *Eurhinosaurus
longirostris,* the supraoccipital is visible posteroventrally to the
parietals, whereas in *Brachypterygius extremus,* *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus,* and *Stenopterygius triscissus* the parietals cover the
supraoccipital dorsally [@Huene1949]. @Mazin1988 [@Godefroit1993a]
described *Leptonectes tenuirostris* and *'Stenopterygius longifrons'*
[Owen, -@Owen1881] (= *Stenopterygius triscissus*) with three facets on
the quadrate condyle that articulate with the articular and the
surangular. Many Lower Jurassic ichthyosaurs have stapes with a shorter
lateral shaft than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* for example,
*Temnodontosaurus azerguensis, Leptonectes tenuirostris,* and
*Eurhinosaurus longirostris*
[@Huene1928; @Huene1951; @Lomax2012; @Martin2012]. Unlike in
*Brachypterygius extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* *Leptonectes*
cf. *tenuirostris* shares a marked ventral notch in the postorbital
region with the Triassic taxa *Cymbospondylus petrinus* and *Phalarodon
atavus*
[@Merriam1908; @McGowan1974a; @Motani1999b; @Maisch2000b; @Maisch2001b; @Maisch2003a; @Maisch2004a].
The dentary of *Eurhinosaurus longirostris* is very low, corresponding
to its reduced size, giving its mandible a generally gracile form
[@Reisdorf2011]. The articular surface in *Leptonectes tenuirostris* and
*Eurhinosaurus longirostris* is larger than in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus,* with well defined facets proximally
[@Owen1881; @Huene1928; @Huene1951].

The humerus of *Leptonectes* does not have either a strongly developed
dorsal or ventral process proximally, and is anteroposteriorly expanded
distally. Anterodistally, the humerus of *Leptonectes* has a rounded
prominence that is not found in thunnosaurian ichthyosaurs
[@McGowan1999a; @McGowan2003; @Fischer2013a]. Anterior notches on the
radius are not present in any of the taxa described above, but are found
in *Leptonectes tenuirostris, Macgowania janiceps,* and *Stenopterygius
quadriscissus,* among others
[@McGowan1991; @McGowan1996; @Motani1999; @Maisch2008b]. The relative
size of metacarpal five compared to various other mesopodial elements,
particularly distal carpals one and four is also regarded as an
important feature [e.g. @Maisch2000c character 100]. In some Liassic
taxa, such as *Leptonectes* [@McGowan1991; @McGowan1999a], the fourth
distal carpal is larger than the fifth metacarpal. The ischium and pubis
are also more equally sized in *Leptonectes solei* [McGowan,
-@McGowan1993], but the pubis is larger, as in *Ichthyosaurus breviceps*
whereas the opposite is the case in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
[@Lomax2010]. In *Leptonectes,* the ischium and pubis are expanded and
fused distally, and proximally in some cases [@Lomax2012].

### *Hauffiopteryx typicus* [Maisch, -@Maisch2008b] {#tax:comp:Htypicus}

*Hauffiopteryx typicus* [Maisch, -@Maisch2008b] was erected to hold part
of the material that had previously been referred to *Stenopterygius
hauffianus* [Huene, -@Huene1922b] [@Maisch2008b; @Maxwell2012 fig. 1].
This taxon is known from the Posidonia Shale Formation (Toarcian) of
south-western Germany [@Maisch2008b], and further specimens have been
referred from the Strawberry Bank Locality, Upper lias (Toarcian) of
south-western United Kingdom, but assignment of these has been
questioned [@Caine2011; @Marek2015]. *Hauffiopteryx typicus* is a
neoichthyosaurian ichthyosaur, usually positioned close to or within
Thunnosauria [@Caine2011; @Maxwell2012b; @Fischer2013a; @Marek2015], but
has also been found as the sister taxon to Leptonectidae [@Caine2011].

The premaxilla in *Hauffiopteryx typicus* does not possess a supranarial
process, and only forms a small part of the ventral border of the
anterior external naris, unlike in *Brachypterygius extremus* and
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [@Maisch2008b; @Caine2011; @Marek2015]. The
short postorbital region and reduced supratemporal fenestra in
*Hauffiopteryx typicus* is similar to members of Leptonectidae,
particularly *Leptonectes* (see
[1.6.10](#tax:comp:Leptonectidae){reference-type="ref"
reference="tax:comp:Leptonectidae"}), and has led to suggestions of an
affinity between these taxa [@Caine2011]. However, this may be due to
ecological convergence with Leptonectidae as more recent phylogenies
recover *Hauffiopteryx typicus* within the more derived Thunnosauria
[@Martin2012; @Fischer2013a]. The quadrate of *Hauffiopteryx typicus*
does not have an occipital lamella dorsally, unlike in *Brachypterygius
extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The quadrate condyle is
neither offset nor as large in *Hauffiopteryx typicus* as in these two
taxa either [@Marek2015]. The size of the paroccipital process of the
opisthotic in *Hauffiopteryx typicus* differs from other
neoichthyosaurians [@Fischer2012 character 20]: it is short and robust,
without being offset from the main body of the opisthotic
[@Caine2011; @Marek2015]. The extracondylar area of the basioccipital in
*Hauffiopteryx typicus* is reduced compared to *Ichthyosaurus* and
*Temnodontosaurus*, but is larger than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,*
and the ventral tubers are broader and more widely separated
[@Marek2015].

The transverse bar of the interclavicle in *Hauffiopteryx typicus* is
pointed distally: a flange of bone joins the two arms of the
[T]{.sans-serif} of the interclavicle, which is not found in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [@Caine2011]. Proximally, the scapula of
*Hauffiopteryx typicus* does not have an enlarged and separate acromion
process, as in the Baracromia [@Maisch2008b; @Caine2011]. Like in
*Stenopterygius* below, and unlike in Ophthalmosauridae, the humerus of
*Hauffiopteryx typicus* does not have a large, demarcated dorsal process
on the humerus, but does retain a large ventral process that extends
more than half of the length of the humerus [@Caine2011]. The
ischiopubis is unfused distally in *Hauffiopteryx typicus*: the ischium
is narrower than the pubis, but the pubis becomes broader proximally and
distally [@Maisch2008b; @Caine2011]. The femur in *Hauffiopteryx
typicus* is expanded distally, and the anterior margin of the leading
edge elements in the hindlimb are notched [@Caine2011]; in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* the distal femur is narrower, and notching
is not present.

### *Ichthyosaurus* [König, -@Konig1818] {#tax:comp:Ichthyosaurus}

The taxonomy of *Ichthyosaurus* [König, -@Konig1818] has been
problematic and is currently the topic of revision. Between four and six
species are currently referred to *Ichthyosaurus*: *Ichthyosaurus
communis* [Conybeare, -@Conybeare1822], *Ichthyosaurus breviceps* [Owen,
-@Owen1881], *Ichthyosaurus conybeari* [Lydekker, -@Lydekker1888], and
*Ichthyosaurus anningae* [Lomax & Massare, -@Lomax2015] are generally
considered to be valid members [@McGowan2003; @Cleary2015; @Lomax2015].
@Maisch1997e [@Maisch2010 166; @Maisch2000c 74] considered
*Ichthyosaurus intermedius* [Conybeare, -@Conybeare1822] to be a
separate valid species, however, recent studies have typically
incorporated the relevant material into *Ichthyosaurus communis*
[@McGowan1974a; @McGowan2003; @Lomax2015]. Additionally, @Maisch2010
[165] has also separated *'Ichthyosaurus' acutirostris* [Owen,
-@Owen1840b] as potentially representing a separate genus. The first
five species of *Ichthyosaurus* detailed above are known from the Lias
Group (Hettangian--Pliensbachian) of Dorset and Somerset, United Kingdom
[@McGowan1974a; @Bennett2012; @Lomax2015], while *'Ichthyosaurus'
acutirostris* is known from the Alum Shale Formation (Toarcian) of
Whitby. Because of these taxonomic issues, comparisons will mostly be
drawn between the first four species of *Ichthyosaurus* listed above
that are accepted as valid; with the most material available,
*Ichthyosaurus communis* will be compared to most extensively.

In *Ichthyosaurus communis,* the vomer is excluded from ventral view
anteriorly as the ventromedial margins of the two premaxilla meet
[@Sollas1916; @McGowan1973], whereas in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* the
vomer is exposed ventrally for its entire length
([\[fig:Oicenicus-palate\]](#fig:Oicenicus-palate){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-palate"}). Like in *Palvennia hoybergeti*
below, the premaxilla of *Ichthyosaurus breviceps* is much shorter than
in *Brachypterygius extremus,* *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* or
*Nannopterygius enthekiodon* at only 49% of the skull length
[@McGowan1974a]. The posterior portion of the premaxilla and nasal in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* is squarer in cross section than in
*Ichthyosaurus communis,* and this is stronger still in *Brachypterygius
extremus*: the premaxillae and nasals have a greater angular
displacement between their dorsal and lateral surfaces
[@Sollas1916; @McGowan1973; @McGowan1976; @Kirton1983]. The supranarial
process of the premaxilla in *Ichthyosaurus communis* extends for the
full length of the external naris, whereas in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus,* the supranarial process is only one-half of the length of the
external naris [@Owen1881; @McGowan1974a; @McGowan2003]. On the maxilla,
the bony ridge that forms the ventral margin of the lachrymal facet is
not as well developed in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* as in
*Ichthyosaurus* (this region is not visible in *Brachypterygius
extremus*), and the latter lacks the posterodorsal palatal processes
seen in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* having medial fenestrations instead
[@McGowan1973]. Sollas's [-@Sollas1916] serial sections of
*Ichthyosaurus* aff. *communis* show the great anterior extent of the
nasals and also that, posteriorly, the nasals meet at the midline with a
tongue and groove suture that is not present in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* [e.g. @Home1820 pl. 16; @Sollas1916 fig. 2(10), sections 288
and 296]. Around and posterior to the external naris, the nasals also
show a lower lateral wall that is not at as great an angle to the dorsal
wall as in *Brachypterygius extremus* or *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* and
here a small facet for the lachrymal can be seen in *Ichthyosaurus
communis* that is not present on the other taxa [@McGowan1973]. Unlike
the taxa described above, *Ichthyosaurus communis, Stenopterygius
triscissus,* and *Sveltonectes insolitus* possess an internasal foramen,
variably developed and usually located entirely between the nasals,
posterior to the external naris
[@McGowan1973; @Godefroit1993a; @Fischer2011c]. The lachrymal of
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* differs markedly from *Ichthyosaurus
communis* in its anterior extent, bordering only the posterior margin of
the external naris in the latter species [@Owen1881; @McGowan1973]. The
shortness of the lachrymal in *Ichthyosaurus communis* allows the
maxilla to contact the external naris in external view. In
*Ichthyosaurus intermedius,* the lachrymal extends ventrally along much
of the external naris, forming interdigitating suture with the
premaxilla that excludes the maxilla from the external naris
[@Maisch1997e], rather than the simple overlap that in seen in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The prefrontal of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
resembles that of *Ichthyosaurus communis,* but in the latter species,
this does not have as elongate an anterior extension
[@McGowan1973; @McGowan1974a]. This prevents the prefrontal from being
included in the external narial opening, and this state is observed in
many other Liassic taxa, for example, *Temnodontosaurus platyodon,
Temnodontosaurus trigonodon,* and *Leptonectes tenuirostris*
[@Owen1881; @McGowan1974; @McGowan1974a; @Maisch2001; @Maisch2003a].
@Motani2005a showed that the prefrontal has a greater dorsal exposure
than was previously thought in *Stenopterygius* and *Ichthyosaurus,*
contacting the frontals along their lateral margin. Unlike the
rectangular frontal of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* the frontal of
*Ichthyosaurus communis* is more crescentic and has a narrower
(laterally) dorsal exposure on the skull roof
[@Owen1881; @Sollas1916; @McGowan1973; @Motani2005a]. *Ichthyosaurus*
aff. *communis* also shows that the entirety of the pineal foramen was
enclosed by the frontals.

While similar to the parietal of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and
*Brachypterygius extremus,* in *Ichthyosaurus* aff. *communis,* the two
ventral processes on the parietal -- lateral and medial -- are more
strongly developed: the lateral process is found in a smaller form in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof,pl3\]](#fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof,pl3){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof,pl3"}), while the medial
process is absent. *Ichthyosaurus* aff. *communis* possesses an ossified
epipterygoid, which contacts the lateral ventral process of the parietal
[@Sollas1916 fig. 2(5), section 453; @McGowan1973]; this element is not
ossified in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* (see also
[1.6.21](#tax:comp:Platypterygius){reference-type="ref"
reference="tax:comp:Platypterygius"}). The parietal of *Ichthyosaurus*
aff. *communis* has a medial process that descends from the transverse
ridge on the ventral surface meets the medial facet with the
contralateral parietal. McGowan's [-@McGowan1973] material shows that
this forms a small transverse plate that he termed the parietal flange.
Neither *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* nor *Brachypterygius extremus* has a
parietal ridge posteriorly that is as strongly developed as
*Ichthyosaurus communis* or *Stenopterygius triscissus*
[@Owen1881; @Godefroit1993a; @Godefroit1995]. The anterior portion of
the postfrontal of *Ichthyosaurus* cf. *communis* is
[Y]{.sans-serif}-shaped compared to the more rounded form of
*Brachypterygius extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* and makes a
smaller contribution to the dorsal skull roof in the former species due
to more extensive overlap by the supratemporal
[@McGowan1973; @Godefroit1995 fig. 35]. The triradiate form of the
supratemporal can be seen in both *Stenopterygius triscissus* and
*Ichthyosaurus* cf. *communis*
[@McGowan1973; @Godefroit1993a; @Godefroit1994]. These two species have
orthogonal orientations of the three rami that create the more
transverse alignment of the posterior of the skull (see [@Godefroit1994
fig. 15B] and [@Caine2011 fig. 3C]). *Ichthyosaurus communis* also does
not have the medially ascending ramus of the supratemporal towards the
contact with the parietal that is present in both *Brachypterygius
extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [@Owen1881; @McGowan1973]. The
squamosal has been identified in some specimens of *Ichthyosaurus
communis,* but may be variable
[@Motani1999b; @Maisch2000d; @Maisch2008a; @Fischer2011b; @Bennett2012].
Certain neoichthyosaurian ichthyosaurs show a slight ventral
emargination between the quadratojugal and jugal, such as *Ichthyosaurus
communis* and possibly *Leptonectes tenuirostris*
[@McGowan1973; @Maisch2003a], whereas in *Brachypterygius extremus,
Nannopterygius enthekiodon,* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* the
posteroventral margin of the quadratojugal is straight. In
*Ichthyosaurus communis,* the large and offset ventral quadrate process
of the quadratojugal causes this emargination as it is placed posterior
to the jugal. The quadratojugal in *Ichthyosaurus communis* also does
not have the long posterior groove seen in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
for the ventral tongue of the squamosal, and it has a well developed
facet for the postorbital on its anterior margin rather than the
external covering seen in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The anterior
process of the jugal in *Ichthyosaurus* tapers anteriorly between the
maxilla and lachrymal along its contact with these bones [@McGowan1973],
whereas *Brachypterygius extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* both
have broader anterior jugals.

The vomer of *Ichthyosaurus* cf. *communis* figured by @McGowan1973
[fig. 33] has a greater medial expansion in its posterior region than is
seen in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The ascending bony spurs
[@McGowan1973 p. 42, fig. 22] may be equivalent to the spinous
projections seen in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*; both support the soft
tissue structures of the nasal capsule. The palatine in *Ichthyosaurus*
takes much the same form as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
[@McGowan1973], although poor preservation of NHMUK PV R8177 in that
region makes detailed comparisons difficult. In *Ichthyosaurus*, the
anterolateral process of the palatine is not as well developed as in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. Dorsally, at the posterior end of the
internal narial margin in *Ichthyosaurus,* is a longitudinal furrow that
forms a corresponding keel ventrally, similar to *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*. The posterior margin of the palatine of *Ichthyosaurus* is
flattened, and thins at the pterygoid contact, but becomes lamellate in
this region [@McGowan1973]. The epipterygoid has been identified in
*Ichthyosaurus,* but infrequently. In this taxon, it takes the form of a
grooved, vertical column, with a complex dorsal suture, where it meets
the parietal, and is longer but narrower ventrally, where it contacts
the pterygoid and was possibly joined to the quadrate via cartilage
[@Woodward1886; @McGowan1973]. Sollas' [@Sollas1916 p. 87, fig. 9]
reconstruction of *Ichthyosaurus* aff. *communis* shows a narrower
outline for the pterygoid than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. There is
also a well developed groove for the epipterygoid (*columella cranii*)
that is not seen in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* further supporting the
lack of ossification of this element in the latter taxon. In
*Ichthyosaurus,* the quadrate is slightly narrower than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. It also has a smoother-surfaced medial and
dorsal margin, without so great an extent of surrounding cartilage
[@Sollas1916; @McGowan1973]. Phylogenetically, the quadrate provides
characters related to its dorsal articulation [@Maxwell2012b character
11] and position of the stapedial facet [@Druckenmiller2010 character
21]. The stapedial facet on the quadrate is positioned on the dorsal
half of the quadrate in *Ichthyosaurus* aff. *communis*
[@Sollas1916; @McGowan1973], but is more ventrally placed in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and *Platypterygius australis* (see
[1.6.21](#tax:comp:Platypterygius){reference-type="ref"
reference="tax:comp:Platypterygius"}; [@Wade1990; @Kear2005a]).

On the opisthotic, the form and membranous structures are much the same
in *Brachypterygius extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* as in
*Ichthyosaurus,* although the paroccipital process is more drawn out in
the former species [@Sollas1916; @McGowan1973]. Lateral foramina in the
supraoccipital are present in *Ichthyosaurus* as well as
*Brachypterygius extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
[@McGowan1973], but the former species does not have a deeply excavated
supraoccipital, so only the lateral exits are present. The exoccipital
of *Ichthyosaurus* has a greater extent of ossification than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* particularly in the ventral facet for the
basioccipital. This facet is extended farther anteriorly in
*Ichthyosaurus* and is also wider than the tongue in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* [@Sollas1916]. @McGowan1973 also showed a groove that cuts
across the basioccipital facet on the exoccipital, possibly carrying a
blood vessel. Furthermore, the anterolateral edge of the exoccipital is
drawn dorsally in *Ichthyosaurus,* surrounding the vagus (jugular)
foramen, and which would have contacted the otic capsule; this is formed
by both the exoccipital and opisthotic in *Brachypterygius extremus* and
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. *Ichthyosaurus* and *Temnodontosaurus* both
exhibit a large extracondylar area that may be higher or wider than the
condyle itself [@Seeley1880a; @Owen1881; @McGowan1973]. Additionally,
*Ichthyosaurus* possesses a greatly drawn out basioccipital peg on its
anterior face, only the rudiments of which can be seen in some specimens
of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* and of which there is no evidence at all
in *Brachypterygius extremus*. The stapes in *Ichthyosaurus* is a
comparatively less robust element than in *Brachypterygius extremus* and
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. Although also convex, the contact on the
stapes with the basioccipital and opisthotic medially is not as broad in
*Ichthyosaurus* as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* and may have a well
developed channel across the middle of the proximal surface of the
stapes for passage of vessels [@Sollas1916; @McGowan1973]. The lateral
shaft of the stapes in *Ichthyosaurus* is also bent distal to the
proximal head, and the quadrate facet is narrower than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* but extended by cartilage [@Owen1881
labelled "paroccipital"].

In *Ichthyosaurus*, the splenial forms a small portion of the alveolar
groove posteriorly [@Home1820; @McGowan1973]. The posterior of the
splenial in *Ichthyosaurus* is also digitate, rather than tapering as
seen in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The angular does not have as much
exposure on the lateral face of the mandible in *Ichthyosaurus* as in
either *Brachypterygius extremus* or *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
[@McGowan1973]; the large exposure is a character of more derived
ichthyosaurs [@Motani1999c character 32; @Maxwell2012b character 29].
The coronoid is significantly reduced in *Ichthyosaurus*
[@Sollas1916; @McGowan1973], although it is still present as a narrow
splint medially in the mandible rather than lost entirely as is likely
in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. In *Ichthyosaurus,* the prearticular is a
generally higher bone anteriorly than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. On
the dorsal margin of the prearticular of *Ichthyosaurus,* there is an
elongate facet for the coronoid that is not seen in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus,* however, the posterior part does not have a well defined
coronoid peak [@McGowan1973]. Ms Joyce Townend's illustrations of
*Ichthyosaurus* cf. *latifrons* [in @Romer1968] show a low peak
posterior to the coronoid process, similar to that seen in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The articular of *Ichthyosaurus* described
by @McGowan1973 has a well developed ventral prearticular facet that is
expanded downwards from the main body; this is not seen in
*Brachypterygius extremus* or *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.

The atlas-axis in *Ichthyosaurus* is more square, particularly in
posterior view, than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* and atlantal and
axial intercentra may also be present in the former taxon
[@McGowan2003]. In *Ichthyosaurus* and some mixosaurids, the anterior
cervical, and possibly more posterior, neural arches may be very tall,
some reaching over twice the height of their respective vertebral centra
[@Owen1881; @Repossi1902; @Sander2000; @Bennett2012; @Massare2014].
Several taxa have fusion between the neural arches of the atlas-axis,
for example, *Ichthyosaurus communis* [@McGowan2003], although it is
never present in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*; this is a diagnostic
character separating *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and *Ophthalmosaurus
natans* (see
[\[synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon\]](#synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon){reference-type="ref"
reference="synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon"};
[@McGowan2003; @Druckenmiller2010]. The gastralial basket of almost all
ichthyosaurs in which it is adequately known, such as *Ichthyosaurus*
and *Stenopterygius*, is constructed of three columns of gastralia: a
medial element flanked by a lateral element on each side
[@Owen1881; @Sander2000 character 75]; it is likely that
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* had the same arrangement.

Distal carpal two and more distal elements are notched in some specimens
of *Ichthyosaurus*, with incidence of this being variable and lacking a
clear taxonomic pattern [@Owen1881; @McGowan1974a; @McGowan2003]. Like
the elements around them, the carpals are more clearly polygonal and
closely articulated in *Ichthyosaurus* than in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus,* like in *Brachypterygius extremus, Caypullisaurus,* and
*Platypterygius*
[@Broili1907; @McGowan1974a; @Fernandez2001; @McGowan2003]. Unlike in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* the phalanges in these taxa are not as
grossly thickened dorsoventrally.

The reduced, styloidal form of the ilium is found in all parvipelvian
ichthyosaurs, its position and orientation being deduced from
articulated specimens [@Wiman1921; @Huene1922]. More variation between
taxa is found in the ischium and pubis (or ischiopubis). In more basal
parvipelvian ichthyosaurs, for example *Ichthyosaurus communis,
Ichthyosaurus breviceps,* and *Leptonectes tenuirostris,* the ilium is
comparatively larger than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
[@Owen1881; @McGowan1974a; @Massare2014]. In *Ichthyosaurus,
Leptonectes,* and *Temnodontosaurus,* fusion of the ischium and pubis is
variable between individual specimens, and may be present proximally,
distally, or both, containing the obturator foramen [@McGowan2003]. On
the femur of *Ichthyosaurus,* the ventral process is slightly demarcated
and offset from the rest of the proximal surface
[@Bennett2012; @Maxwell2012c; @Massare2014].

### *Janusaurus lundi* [Roberts *et al.*, -@Roberts2014] {#tax:comp:Jlundi}

*Janusaurus lundi* [Roberts *et al.*, -@Roberts2014] from the Sløttsmoya
Member of the Agardfjellet Formation (Tithonian) in known from a single
specimen that includes much of the skull and disarticulated anterior
trunk region. Phylogenetic analysis places this taxon within
Ophthalmosaurinae as sister to *Cryopterygius kristiansenae* and
*Palvennia hoybergeti* [@Roberts2014].

The posterior premaxilla in *Janusaurus lundi* is poorly preserved, but
contacts the lachrymal extensively, unlike in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus,* and possibly extends posteriorly to contact the anterior
jugal. A similar, but smaller contact between these two bones is
possible in *Brachypterygius extremus*
([1.30](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull"}) but is caused by anterior
extension of the jugal rather than posterior extension of the
premaxilla, as in *Janusaurus lundi*. Ventrally, the maxilla of
*Janusaurus lundi* has a very narrow lateral exposure, and posterior to
this, the jugal has a slight ventral deflection. The prefrontal has a
smaller exposure dorsally and laterally in *Janusaurus lundi* than in
*Brachypterygius extremus,* and like in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,*
approaches the external naris, but does not contact it. The postorbital
region is narrow in *Janusaurus lundi,* as in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus,* but the posteroventral quadratojugal seems to have greater
lateral exposure around the ventral contact with the quadrate. While the
basioccipital of *Janusaurus lundi* is crushed, the extracondylar area
appears reduced in posterior view compared to *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus,* but the lateral facets for the opisthotic and stapes are more
extensive than in *Palvennia hoybergeti* (see
[1.6.18](#tax:comp:Phoybergeti){reference-type="ref"
reference="tax:comp:Phoybergeti"}). The stapedial shaft is gracile in
*Janusaurus lundi,* not as robust as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[pl11\]](#pl11){reference-type="ref" reference="pl11"}). The mandible
of *Janusaurus lundi* has a similar configuration to *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus,* but medially, the prearticular of *Janusaurus lundi* is more
strongly developed than in *Brachypterygius extremus* or
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. Both the prearticular and surangular of
*Janusaurus lundi* have well developed processes in the preglenoid
region (paracoronoid and MAME processes), whereas in the taxa described
here, these are limited to smaller processes or flanges on these bones.
*Janusaurus lundi* may preserve an ossified coronoid.

The clavicles of *Janusaurus lundi* share the similar medial
interdigitation articulation that @Seeley1874 used to characterise
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* but in the former taxon there does not
appear to be any exposure of the interclavicle between the clavicles,
nor do the clavicles wrap strongly around the transverse bar of the
interclavicle ([1.23](#fig:Oicenicus-pectoral){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-pectoral"}). The ventral interclavicle of
*Janusaurus lundi* has a foramen centrally and a distinct groove on the
posterior bar dorsally. In *Janusaurus lundi,* the humerus follows the
configuration of distal facets of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* but is not
so anteroposteriorly expanded distally, and the dorsal and ventral
processes of the humerus are not so large, although this may be an
effect of preservation. The ilium of *Janusaurus lundi* has a prominent
anterodorsal process, and the ischiopubic plate end distally in a
square, oblique margin; there is no obturator foramen, nor evidence of
the suture between the ischium and pubis.

### *Leninia stellans* [Fischer *et al.*, -@Fischer2014] {#tax:comp:Lstellans}

*Leninia stellans* [Fischer *et al.*, -@Fischer2014] is known from a
partial skull from the *Deshayesites volgensis* Ammonite Biozone
(Aptian) of the Kriushi locality, Ulyanovsk Region, Russia. The
phylogenetic analysis included with the original description placed
*Leninia stellans* as one of the most basal ophthalmosaurines, alongside
*Mollesaurus periallus* [@Fischer2014; @Arkhangelsky2014], whereas
@Roberts2014 found *Leninia stellans* to be the sister taxon to
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* with these two taxa together as sister to
*Acamptonectes densus* within Ophthalmosaurinae.

The prefrontal in *Leninia stellans* is excluded from contributing to
the external naris by the nasal, similar to *Brachypterygius extremus,*
whereas there is a small contact in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. Unlike
other ophthalmosaurids, the prefrontal extends anterodorsally,
compressing the nasal and forming a large part of the anterodorsal skull
roof. An internasal foramen is enclosed between the posteromedialmost
nasals and the anteromedial frontals of *Leninia stellans*. The
postfrontal contact with the supratemporal is large in *Leninia
stellans* and the supratemporal has two large processes, laterally and
medially, that overlap the postfrontal to a greater extent than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor"}), and does not seem to be
present in *Brachypterygius extremus*
([\[fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull\]](#fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull"}). The
postorbital region is anteroposteriorly longer in *Leninia stellans*
than in *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* and
the postorbital and quadratojugal have a broader later exposure in the
first taxon than the latter two. The extracondylar area in *Leninia
stellans* is of a similar size to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* and larger
than in *Brachypterygius extremus*. Evidence for a stapes-supratemporal
contact is seen in *Leninia stellans*, but was previously known only
from *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and *Ophthalmosaurus natans*. Unlike in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and *Janusaurus lundi* (see
[1.6.13](#tax:comp:Jlundi){reference-type="ref"
reference="tax:comp:Jlundi"}; [@Roberts2014]), the angular does not
greatly expand dorsoventrally ventral to the orbit in *Leninia
stellans*, however, the angular does become higher more posteriorly.

### *Maiaspondylus lindoei* [Maxwell & Caldwell, -@Maxwell2006a] {#tax:comp:Mlindoei}

*Maiaspondylus lindoei* [Maxwell & Caldwell, -@Maxwell2006a] is known
from the Loon River Formation (Albian) of a locality on the Hay River,
Northwest territories, Canada. The material is incomplete, but parts of
the snout, basicranium, pectoral girdle and forelimb, and vertebral
column are represented by several specimens
[@Maxwell2003; @Maxwell2006a]. However, these are all embryos or
juvenile specimens, so may show features that are subject to ontogenetic
change [@Johnson1979]. Phylogenetic analyses have recovered
*Maiaspondylus lindoei* within Platypterygiinae, close to *Aegirosaurus
leptospondylus* and *Brachypterygius extremus*
[@Fischer2012; @Fischer2013a; @Roberts2014; @Arkhangelsky2014], as
sister to *Platypterygius americanus* [@Druckenmiller2010], or even
sister to Ophthalmosauridae itself [@Motani2015].

The premaxilla and lachrymal in *Maiaspondylus lindoei* contact ventral
to the external naris, more extensively than in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus,* similar to *Brachypterygius extremus*
([1.30](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull"}). In *Maiaspondylus lindoei*, the
humerus is relatively stouter than in the taxa described above, with the
proximal and distal portions having subequal widths. The distal humeral
facets share their configuration with *Aegirosaurus leptospondylus* and
*Brachypterygius extremus,* and the more distal forelimb elements are
square.

### Mixosauridae [Baur, -@Baur1887] {#tax:comp:Mixosauridae}

Mixosauridae (= Mixosauria *sensu* [@Motani1999c]) is a clade within
Eoichthyosauria, included in Motani's [-@Motani2005] intermediate grade.
This clade of typically small ichthyosaurs from the Middle Triassic is
well defined and supported, with two genera included: *Mixosaurus*
[Baur, -@Baur1887] and *Phalarodon* [Merriam, -@Merriam1910], although
the taxonomy of these taxa is variable
[@McGowan2003; @Jiang2005a; @Jiang2006; @Maisch2010].

Unlike *Brachypterygius extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,*
*Phalarodon atavus* [Quenstedt, -@Quenstedt1852] does not have either a
supra- nor subnarial process posteriorly on the premaxilla. The
premaxilla instead terminates posteriorly at the anterior margin of the
external naris [@Merriam1908; @Liu2013]. In mixosaurids, the alveolar
groove becomes much shallower than in *Brachypterygius extremus* or
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* and the teeth are set in shallow sockets and
ankylosed to the bone [@Fraas1891; @Repossi1902; @Motani1997a].
*Phalarodon atavus* exemplifies the condition of the lachrymal in many
Triassic ichthyosaurs: the lachrymal is exposed as a crescentic bone on
the anterior margin of the orbit, with a long posteroventral jugal
process [@Maisch2000b; @Liu2013]. In mixosaurids and 'shastasaurid'
ichthyosaurs, the external naris is more elongate than in the most basal
Ichthyosauriformes, for example, *Phalarodon atavus, Mixosaurus
cornalianus,* and *Shonisaurus popularis*
[@Camp1980; @Motani1999b; @Maisch2001c; @Liu2013]. The frontals in
mixosaurids are strongly modified by the high sagittal and lateral
ridges dorsally that delimit the anterior terrace of the supratemporal
fenestra ([@Motani1999b; @Liu2013]; [see also @Motani1999c fig. 3]). In
the mixosaurids *Mixosaurus cornalianus* [Bassani, -@Bassani1886] and
*Phalarodon atavus* [@Huene1925; @Motani1999b; @Maisch2001c], the
postfrontal is rather small, corresponding to the small size of the
temporal fenestra and the short postorbital region. Isolated instances
in *Phalarodon atavus* and *Mixosaurus cornalianus* show the squamosal
to be a much narrower, but still square element at the posterior of the
skull [@Huene1949a; @Motani1999b; @Liu2013]. In *Mixosaurus
panxianensis* [Jiang *et al.,* -@Jiang2006], the squamosal is lengthened
ventrally to contact the embayment ventral to the cheek region alongside
the postorbital [@Jiang2006]. The supratemporal fenestrae in these
ichthyosaurs are positioned relatively far posteriorly, so that the
postfrontal borders very little of it [@Motani1999b], but is raised to
form the lateral margin of the anterior terrace of the supratemporal
fenestra. The supratemporal fenestra in the mixosaurids *Mixosaurus
cornalianus* and *Phalarodon atavus* is much smaller than most other
ichthyosaurs, and corresponds to a small supratemporal, which
nonetheless has considerable posterior exposure
[@Motani1999b; @Maisch2001c; @Liu2013]. In dorsal view, the
supratemporal fenestra in mixosaurids obscured by an anterodorsal sheet
extension of the posterodorsal supratemporal that is not present in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* or *Brachypterygius extremus*
[@Motani1999b; @Maisch2001c].

The palatines of *Mixosaurus cornalianus* can be seen in ventral view in
GPIT 1799/1 and 1799/2 [@Maisch1997d]. These specimens show that the
palatines have a much greater contribution, at their posterior margins,
to the subtemporal fenestrae, compared to their almost complete
exclusion by the pterygoids in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. Mixosaurid
ichthyosaurs lack an interpterygoid vacuity, exemplified by *Phalarodon
atavus* and *Mixosaurus cornalianus* [@Maisch1997d; @Maisch2001c]; the
pterygoids meet each other medially for almost their entire lengths.
Some mixosaurids possess a more laterally-directed quadrate condyle, for
example *Phalarodon callawayi* [Schmitz *et al.*, -@Schmitz2004] and
*Mixosaurus panxianensis* [@Schmitz2004; @Jiang2006]. In the otic
capsule, there is a much closer contact between the opisthotic and the
prootic bones in *Mixosaurus cornalianus* and *Phantomosaurus neubigi*
[@Maisch2006d; @Maisch2006b] than in the ophthalmosaurid ichthyosaurs
described above. The well-preserved specimen of *Mixosaurus cornalianus*
(PIMUZ T4848) also shows a greater expansion of the prootic anteriorly
than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. Facets are present for contact with
the supraoccipital dorsally (shared with the opisthotic) and the
basisphenoid portion of the parabasisphenoid anteriorly as well as a
foramen that may have carried the facial (VII) nerve [@Maisch2006d].
Whilst otic cartilage would have been present, the severe reduction of
the prootic in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* has reduced and removed all
such structures from ossification. Poor preservation of the otic capsule
has led to erroneous reconstructions of the position of the opisthotic
despite the relatively complete material available
[@Cope1870; @Bauer1900]. The Triassic ichthyosaurs *Mixosaurus
cornalianus* and *Phantomosaurus neubigi* have a larger opisthotic in
the otic region than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* due to a relatively
elongate paraoccipital process [@Maisch2006b; @Maisch2006d]. This
elongation of the opisthotic does not form an offset shaft, as in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* but forms a constriction and a thin,
elongate paroccipital process. The stapes in *Phalarodon atavus* is
slender medially [@Merriam1908; @Huene1916; @Huene1936a]. @Nicholls1999
[p. 12, fig. 9] describe a small basal plate in *Phalarodon fraasi*
[Merriam, -@Merriam1910] [after @Schmitz2005; @Jiang2006; @Liu2013],
with clear dorsal process, that grades into a long, slender distal
process. There is a strong curve midway along the length of the process,
with a ventral tuber that corresponds to a similar structure in Jurassic
ichthyosaurs. @Merriam1908 [25] noted that no facet was present on the
quadrate for reception of the stapes, but this was likely due to poor
preservation.

Mixosaurids have a subthecodont tooth implantation [@Motani1997a],
variably developed. In particular, *Mixosaurus cornalianus* is
characterised by a distinct narrowing of the alveolar groove between the
teeth [@Repossi1902; @Maisch1997d; @Motani1997a]. @Jiang2005a
[@Maisch2008] commented on the lack of clear sutures in the symphysial
region of the dentary in *'Mixosaurus maotaiensis'* [Young, -@Young1965]
and *Qianichthyosaurus zhoui*. Some mixosaurid ichthyosaurs have lower,
rounded posterior teeth, for example, *Phalarodon fraasi* and
*Xinminosaurus catactes* [Jiang *et al.*, -@Jiang2008a] [@Motani2005b],
Massare's [-@Massare1987] 'crush' guild; the anterior teeth in these
taxa are conical.

Unlike most other ichthyosaur taxa, mixosaurids have a medially narrow
clavicle that may have had a broad ventral blade not present in
*Brachypterygius extremus* or *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
[@Repossi1902; @Maisch2003b]. Despite the narrower median architecture
of the clavicles than *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* mixosaurid
ichthyosaurs have a broad interclavicle, which is more triangular in
outline than the attenuated [T]{.sans-serif}-shape of other
ichthyosaurs. The anterior face of the interclavicle retains a
triradiate ridge that marks the location of the clavicles and muscle
attachment [@Repossi1902; @Jiang2005a; @Jiang2006]. Both *Mixosaurus
kuhnschneyderi* [Brinkmann, @Brinkmann1998a] and *Cymbospondylus
petrinus* have a broad anterolateral emargination on the coracoid that
marks the anterior scapular facet laterally, and much of the rest of the
coracoidal margin is a continuous curve
[@Repossi1902; @Merriam1905a; @Chen2009].

The anterior flange of the humerus is seen well in several mixosaurid
taxa, where the large development of this flange can extend the radial
facet anteriorly greatly, for example in *Mixosaurus xindianensis* [Chen
& Cheng, -@Chen2010] and *Mixosaurus cornalianus* [@Repossi1902]. The
constricted diaphysis is reduced in mixosaurids, and the epipodials
become shorter, relative to the humerus [@Repossi1902; @Schmitz2004].
The metacarpals of mixosaurid ichthyosaurs are more homogeneous in form:
slightly elongate, with a minor median constriction, and an overall
quadrate shape, as in *Mixosaurus cornalianus*
[@Repossi1902; @Wiman1912]. The phalanges in mixosaurids have a square
outline and slight evidence of a diaphysis [@Repossi1902; @Chen2010]. In
mixosaurids, the femur is elongate distally, with long distal facets for
articulation with the epipodials; the anterior (tibial) facet is
particularly elongate. While the dorsal and ventral processes of the
femur are present in these taxa, they are not as large as in more
derived taxa, nor are they offset from the main shaft
[@Repossi1902; @Nicholls1999; @Maxwell2012c]. Furthermore, the posterior
(fibular) facet is angled more strongly posteriorly, so that the tibia
and fibula diverge more markedly [@Wiman1910]. In these more basal taxa,
the femur, and the hindlimb generally, is not much smaller than the
forelimb, becoming strongly reduced in more derived taxa [@McGowan2003].
In *Mixosaurus cornalianus,* the tibia is relatively larger than the
fibula, with a strong median constriction, creating an hourglass-shaped
element. Distally, the tibia articulates with three elements, while the
fibula articulates with two; the astragalus is inserted between the two
epipodials distally, and the fibula is deflected posteriorly by its
articulation with the femur [@Repossi1902; @Wiman1910]. Some mixosaurids
show a contribution to the border of the *spatium interosseum* by the
astragalus [@Jiang2006]. The hindlimb elements of mixosaurid
ichthyosaurs are slightly shortened relative to the above taxa, but
retain the shaft-like appearance by a medial constriction, with wider
proximal and distal ends [@Repossi1902; @Brinkmann1996; @Jiang2006]. The
astragalus is proximally pointed and inserts between the distal faces of
the tibia and fibula; in some mixosaurid taxa, the astragalus takes part
distally in the *spatium interosseum* between the tibia and fibula
[@Jiang2006].

### *Mollesaurus periallus* [Fernández, -@Fernandez1999] {#tax:comp:Mperiallus}

*Mollesaurus periallus* [Fernández, -@Fernandez1999] is known from the
Los Molles Formation (Bajocian) of Chacaico Sur, Neuquén Province,
Argentina, but only known from partial skull remains
[@Fernandez1999; @Fernandez2014]. It has been recovered as one of the
more basal ophthalmosaurids [@Druckenmiller2010], or as the most basal
ophthalmosaurine ichthyosaur in phylogenetic analysis
[@Fischer2012; @Fischer2013a; @Fernandez2014; @Roberts2014; @Arkhangelsky2014].

Ventrally in *Mollesaurus periallus,* the jugal broadens anteriorly to
cover much of the posterior maxilla laterally, as in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*. The postorbital region of *Mollesaurus periallus* is broader
than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* and the squamosal is square in the
former taxon rather than triangular in the latter taxon
([\[pl04\]](#pl04){reference-type="ref" reference="pl04"}, figs 1,2).
However, the quadratojugal has a very narrow lateral exposure in
*Mollesaurus periallus* as it is covered by the squamosal dorsally and
the dorsal process of the jugal ventrally. In *Mollesaurus periallus,*
the exoccipital possesses only one foramen for the passage of the XII
nerve and the vagus foramen is almost entirely enclosed by the
exoccipital, surrounded by the opisthotic facets. The extracondylar area
of the basisphenoid of *Mollesaurus periallus* is similar to
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* but larger than in *Brachypterygius
extremus,* and the ventral tubers and median notch are present, as in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. In *Mollesaurus periallus,* the stapes has a
robust lateral shaft, which is not clearly offset from the medial head
as it is in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The ribs of *Mollesaurus
periallus* are more robust proximally than in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus,* with a dorsal ridge extending along the external side from
the capitulum in the more anterior ribs [@Talevi2012].

### *Palvennia hoybergeti* [Druckenmiller *et al.*, -@Druckenmiller2012a] {#tax:comp:Phoybergeti}

*Palvennia hoybergeti* [Druckenmiller *et al.*, -@Druckenmiller2012a] is
known from a single, moderately well-preserved skull in dorsal view from
the Sløttsmoya Member of the Agardfjellet Formation (Tithonian) of
Spitsbergen, Svalbard [@Druckenmiller2012a]. This taxon has only been
included in a phylogenetic analysis by @Roberts2014, who found it to be
within the Ophthalmosaurinae alongside *Cryopterygius kristiansenae* and
*Janusaurus lundi*.

Like *Ichthyosaurus breviceps,* the snout and premaxilla of *Palvennia
hoybergeti* is relatively shorter than in the taxa described here; the
premaxilla is *c.* 50% of the total skull length, but this not
dissimilar to *Brachypterygius extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.
Because of the short snout, the premaxillae diverge relatively far
anteriorly, so that the nasals have a greater exposure dorsally than in
other ichthyosaur taxa. Although poorly preserved, the external narial
region suggests that the premaxilla and lachrymal of *Palvennia
hoybergeti* do not contact, or if they do, that this contact is small,
as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor"}), but not as extensive as in
*Brachypterygius extremus*
([1.30](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull"}). Dorsally, the frontal in
*Palvennia hoybergeti* have a small exposure and enclose a large pineal
foramen, larger than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* that is bordered
posteromedially by the parietals. The exoccipitals of *Palvennia
hoybergeti, Platypterygius australis,* and *Ophthalmosaurus natans* make
a larger contribution to the *foramen magnum* than the supraoccipital;
the reverse is found in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* (see
[\[synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon\]](#synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon){reference-type="ref"
reference="synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon"}). The extracondylar area
of the basioccipital in *Palvennia hoybergeti* is not visible in
posterior view and there are no ventral tubers or notch, more similar to
*Brachypterygius extremus* than the basioccipital of *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*. However, the extracondylar are is extensive in lateral view
and reduces the lateral articular are for the opisthotic and stapes. The
stapes has a more slender shaft in *Palvennia hoybergeti* than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* although the medial head is similarly
bulbous in both taxa. There is no visible suture line on the atlas-axis
of *Palvennia hoybergeti*. A fragment of the humerus suggests *Palvennia
hoybergeti* may have possessed a distal facet for a post-axial accessory
element.

### *Paraophthalmosaurus* [Arkhangelsky, -@Arkhangelsky1997] {#tax:comp:Paraophthalmosaurus}

As discussed above (see
[\[OphthalmosaurusDiscussion,OicenicusDiscussion\]](#OphthalmosaurusDiscussion,OicenicusDiscussion){reference-type="ref"
reference="OphthalmosaurusDiscussion,OicenicusDiscussion"}),
@Arkhangelsky2014 recently revised *Paraophthalmosaurus* to include
*Paraophthalmosaurus saveljeviensis* and *'Yasykovia' kabanovi*. These
taxa have both been considered synonymous with *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* [@Maisch2000c; @McGowan2003; @Maisch2010]. Known remains of
*Paraophthalmosaurus* include partial skeletons and pectoral material
referred to *Paraophthalmosaurus saveljeviensis*
[@Arkhangelsky1997; @Arkhangelsky1998], and pectoral, forelimb, and
hindlimb, material referred to *Paraophthalmosaurus kabanovi*
[@Efimov1999]. All of this material derives from the middle Volgian
(Tithonian) of Saratov and Ulyanovsk regions, Russia. The phylogenetic
analysis of @Arkhangelsky2014 recovered a monophyletic
*Paraophthalmosaurus* (hence their revision of these taxa), which is
within Ophthalmosaurinae and sister to the polytomy *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*.

The prefrontal of *Paraophthalmosaurus saveljeviensis* seems to be
broadly excluded from the external naris by contact between the nasal
and lachrymal, similar to the condition in *Brachypterygius extremus*
([\[fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull\]](#fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-CAMSM-skull,fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull"}). There
is uncertainty regarding the extent of the quadratojugal and squamosal,
and the presence of the latter, but in *Paraophthalmosaurus
saveljeviensis,* the postorbital region is narrow, as in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* with a particularly narrow postorbital bone
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-lat"}). In *Paraophthalmosaurus
saveljeviensis*, the posterior lower jaw is similar in form to both
*Brachypterygius extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.

As in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* the distal clavicles of
*Paraophthalmosaurus saveljeviensis* are deflected, presumably to
encompass the distal scapula. The form of the coracoids in
*Paraophthalmosaurus saveljeviensis* shown by @Arkhangelsky1997 [figs 1,
2г] is unusual among ichthyosaurs: the lateral margins are straight and
continuous, while the medial margins are angled obliquely and diverge
posterior to the coracoidal symphysis. A similar, elongate form of the
coracoid is found in *Stenopterygius, Paraophthalmosaurus,* and
*Nannopterygius enthekiodon,* among other taxa
[[1.36](#fig:Baptanodon-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Baptanodon-skull"};
@Johnson1979; @Efimov1999a; @Arkhangelsky2014]. However, the posterior
coracoids of *Paraophthalmosaurus saveljeviensis* are angled
posteromedially, while the posterior coracoids of both
*Paraophthalmosaurus kabanovi* and *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* are
angled obliquely posterolaterally [@Efimov1999a]. This is clearly
different from the more rounded posterior margin of *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*
([\[fig:Oicenicus-pectoral,fig:Oicenicus-coracoid,pl20\]](#fig:Oicenicus-pectoral,fig:Oicenicus-coracoid,pl20){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-pectoral,fig:Oicenicus-coracoid,pl20"}, figs 5,
6, [\[pl21\]](#pl21){reference-type="ref" reference="pl21"}, figs 1--4),
but possibly similar to the coracoid of *Brachypterygius extremus*
([1.30](#fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-BRSMG-skull"}). Additionally, the proximal
scapula of *Paraophthalmosaurus kabanovi* is robust and has a bipartite
articulation with the coracoid, enclosing the *fenestra
coracoscapularis*; this feature is only otherwise seen in some specimens
of *Stenopterygius* [@Johnson1979]. The humerus of *Paraophthalmosaurus*
has the same distal facet configuration as *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.
The proximal humerus is wider than the distal humerus in
*Paraophthalmosaurus kabanovi,* which is the case in *Nannopterygius
enthekiodon* ([1.35](#fig:Nenthekiodon-pectoral){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Nenthekiodon-pectoral"}) and Ophthalmosauridae
indet. approaches this ([\[pl35\]](#pl35){reference-type="ref"
reference="pl35"}, figs 4--6). The femur referred by @Efimov1999 to
*'Yasykovia' kabanovi* has three distal facets for articulation with a
pre-axial accessory element, tibia, and fibula respectively, this is
found in some Cretaceous taxa referred to *Platypterygius,* and
*Maiaspondylus,* but is not known in the Jurassic taxa described above.

### *Phantomosaurus neubigi* [Sander, -@Sander1997] {#tax:comp:Pneubigi}

*Phantomosaurus neubigi* [Sander, -@Sander1997] is known from the
Muschelkalk (Anisian) of Karlstadt, Bavaria, Germany. It was recovered
as phylogenetically close to *Cymbospondylus* by @Maisch2000c, but shows
particularly features of the braincase that are briefly compared here.

The internal carotid foramen shows important variation in both its
position and form [@Maisch2000c character 42; @Maxwell2012b character
10]. In *Phantomosaurus neubigi,* the internal carotid foramen is
positioned ventrally on the basisphenoid, but is divided sagittally into
two, similar to *Mikadocephalus gracilirostris* [Maisch & Matzke,
-@Maisch1997c] and *Temnodontosaurus*
spp. [@Maisch1997c; @Maisch2006b; @Maisch2002b; @Martin2012]. The
supraoccipital in *Phantomosaurus neubigi* contacts two supernumerary
bones (postparietals) dorsally in elliptical facets [@Maisch2006b].
Unlike in later ichthyosaurs, the exoccipital in *Phantomosaurus
neubigi* has only a single foramen, but it is fused to the large
opisthotic laterally [@Maisch2006b]. The basioccipital of
*Phantomosaurus neubigi* is flattened dorsoventrally in the condylar
region, but features two robust and well developed ventral tubers that
contact the pterygoid ventrally and the much enlarged opisthotic
laterally [@Sander1997; @Maisch2006b].

### *Platypterygius* [Huene, -@Huene1922b] {#tax:comp:Platypterygius}

*Platypterygius* [Huene, -@Huene1922b] has been considered a wastebasket
taxon for Cretaceous ichthyosaurs [@McGowan2003], although the material
is currently being reappraised and reassigned [e.g.
@Fischer2014b; @Fischer2014a]. The genus *Platypterygius* contains nine
valid species, although some of these are putative or may be composites.
While many of these species have largely complete remains, the best
known are *Platypterygius americanus* [Nace, -@Nace1939],
*Platypterygius australis* [M'Coy, -@MCoy1867], and *Platypterygius
hercynicus* [Kuhn, -@Kuhn1946], the remains of which have been
re-described recently and will be the focus of the comparisons below
[@Romer1968; @Kear2005a; @Kolb2009; @Fischer2011b; @Maxwell2010a; @Zammit2010a].
*Platypterygius americanus* is known from the Albian--Cenomanian of the
USA with variously complete specimens that include much of the skeleton
[@Romer1968; @Maxwell2010a]. *Platypterygius australis* is known from
the Albian of Queensland, Australia, again with specimens representing
much of the skeleton [@Wade1984; @Wade1990; @Kear2005a; @Zammit2010a].
*Platypterygius hercynicus,* however, is known from two specimens from
the Albian of Saint-Jouin-Bruneval, Seine-Maritime, France, and the
Aptian of Salzgitter, Lower Saxony, Germany [@Kolb2009; @Fischer2011b].
Recent phylogenetic analyses have not recovered a monophyletic
*Platypterygius,* but few of the valid species have been included in any
single analysis, and the genus is often paraphyletic with respect to
*Caypullisaurus bonapartei* [Fernández, -@Fernandez1997a],
*Pervushovisaurus bannovkensis* [Arkhangelsky, -@Arkhangelsky1998a], and
*Simbirskiasaurus birjukovi* [Otschev & Efimov, -@Otschev1985] within
Platypterygiinae [@Fischer2013a; @Roberts2014].

Three-dimensionally preserved and rendered remains of *Platypterygius
australis* suggest that the maxilla in this taxon was exposed along much
of the posterior part of the rostrum, forming the posterior and ventral
margins of the external naris and preventing the lachrymal from
contributing to the external naris [@Kear2005a]. The dorsal extension of
the maxilla in *Platypterygius australis* is interpreted as a neomorphic
development, possibly of the dorsal process of the maxilla, different
from the postnarial process seen in Triassic ichthyosaurs
[@Maisch2000c; @Kear2005a]. *Platypterygius australis* also shows
evidence of the tongue-like medial processes on the maxilla interpreted
as support for the soft tissues of the nasal cavity, similar to those
described above in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[pl1\]](#pl1){reference-type="ref" reference="pl1"}, figs 1, 2). Both
*Platypterygius australis* and *Platypterygius hercynicus* show a
greater development of the dorsal ridges on the nasals that surround the
*excavatio internasalis* into dorsal ridges than *Brachypterygius
extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* and well developed posterior
processes that overlap the anterior of the postfrontal
[@Kear2005a; @Kolb2009; @Fischer2011b]. *Platypterygius australis* has a
bony pillar that divides the external naris into two foramina, anterior
and posteriorly; this is similar to the condition in *Simbirskiasaurus
birjukovi* and *Pervushovisaurus bannovkensis*, although the lachrymal
forms the posterior border to the external naris in *Simbirskiasaurus
birjukovi* [@Fischer2014c], but clearly differs from the undivided naris
of *Brachypterygius extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. In both
*Platypterygius australis* and *Platypterygius hercynicus,* the frontal
has a more extensive exposure than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and
contributes to the border of the supratemporal fenestra
[@Kear2005a; @Kolb2009; @Fischer2011b]. In *Platypterygius australis*
there is a greater contribution by the parietals to the pineal foramen
than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* whereas in *Platypterygius
hercynicus,* the parietals are entirely excluded from contributing to
the pineal foramen by the frontals [after @Fischer2011b]. The
postfrontal in *Platypterygius australis* and *Platypterygius
hercynicus* is a more important component of the dorsolateral skull roof
than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* making up most of its margin in
dorsal view [@Kuhn1946; @Kear2005a; @Kolb2009; @Fischer2011b].
Anteriorly, the postfrontal in both *Platypterygius australis* and
*Platypterygius hercynicus* is overlapped by a posterior process of the
nasal and prevented from contacting the parietal (in dorsal view) by the
temporal process of the frontal [@Fischer2011b fig. 2C]. While a
definite squamosal is not known in *Platypterygius,* @Fischer2011b [130]
inferred its presence in *Platypterygius hercynicus* from large facets
on the quadratojugal. In *Platypterygius americanus, Platypterygius
australis,* and *Platypterygius sachicarum* [Páramo, -@Paramo1997] from
the Paja Formation (Barremian--Aptian) of Colombia, there is no evidence
of a squamosal from the surrounding bones, so its loss is considered to
be real
[@Romer1968; @Wade1984; @Wade1990; @Paramo1997; @Kear2005a; @Fischer2011b; @Kear2014].

The vomer of *Platypterygius australis* ascends posteriorly into a
dorsal sheet, which posteriorly, has embayments similar to the extent in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[fig:Oicenicus-vomer,pl05\]](#fig:Oicenicus-vomer,pl05){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-vomer,pl05"}, figs 1--4) but dorsally, the
process has a stronger tongue-and-groove suture with the nasal in
*Platypterygius australis* [@Kear2005a]. Medially, the vomer in
*Platypterygius australis* is grooved for reception of the broad
anterior portion of the parasphenoid, with a larger facet dorsal to this
[@Kear2005a]; in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* this is almost entirely
held between the anterior rami of the pterygoids. In *Platypterygius
australis,* the anterolateral process of the palatine forms an
interdigitating suture with the maxilla, which is more complex than the
tongue-and-groove structure found in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
[@Kear2005a]. Unlike in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* there is no anterior
extension on the palatine of *Platypterygius australis* medial to the
internal naris; this medial border of the internal naris is formed
entirely by the vomer in *Platypterygius australis* [@Kear2005a]. The
pterygoid in *Platypterygius australis* has well-developed facets on the
pterygoid for the epipterygoid that are not found in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* ([\[pl06\]](#pl06){reference-type="ref" reference="pl06"},
figs 1,2) despite its apparent lack of ossification. The quadrate in
*Platypterygius australis* and *Platypterygius hercynicus,* as in
*Sisteronia seeleyi,* does not have a quadrate lamella dorsally as found
in *Brachypterygius extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* and the
condylar area ventrally is more massive and angled further anteriorly
than in the taxa described above [@Kear2005a; @Kolb2009; @Fischer2014b].
In *Platypterygius australis,* the prootic is a hexagonal element, more
angled than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[fig:Oicenicus-prootic,pl08\]](#fig:Oicenicus-prootic,pl08){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-prootic,pl08"}, figs 1,2), with a
dorsally-positioned protuberance on the anterior face; whether this is
due to the extent of ossification is uncertain. *Platypterygius
australis* does not have the dorsal contact between the exoccipital and
opisthotic found in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [@Kear2005a]. The
position of the notochord on the articular condyle is variable between
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* and *Platypterygius* and *Brachypterygius
extremus*: in the former species, as well as in Liassic ichthyosaur
taxa, the notochordal pit is placed centrally
[@Appleby1961; @McGowan1973]. *Platypterygius* and *Brachypterygius
extremus* clearly have more dorsally located notochordal pits
[@Broili1909; @Kear2005a]. *Platypterygius* shows a much more expanded
medial stapedial head; this was greater in *Platypterygius
platydactylus* [Broili, -@Broili1907] from the Aptian of Lower Saxony,
Germany, and *Platypterygius australis* than in *'Platypterygius
brunsvicensis'* [Broili, -@Broili1909] from the Neocomian
(Berriasian--Aptian) of Lower Saxony, Germany [@Wade1990; @Kear2005a].
*Platypterygius hercynicus* and *Platypterygius platydactylus* also have
a concave anterior margin on the stapes, rather than the straight form
in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [@Broili1907; @Kolb2009; @Fischer2011b].

In *Platypterygius australis,* the prearticular does not extend along as
much of the jaw length as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[fig:Oicenicus-jaw\]](#fig:Oicenicus-jaw){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-jaw"}), and is a higher, curved element,
compared to the straighter form of the prearticular in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* [@Kear2005a]. Posteriorly, the angular forms a greater
proportion of the height of the mandible in *Platypterygius australis*
than in either *Brachypterygius extremus* or *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.
*Platypterygius* and *Brachypterygius extremus* have somewhat rounder
and higher articulars than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* that may help
identify platypterygiine ichthyosaurs [@Broili1907; @Kear2005a],
although shape variation seems continuous across Ophthalmosauridae.
Unlike most other ichthyosaurs, tooth plication in *Platypterygius* is
poorly developed and restricted more to the middle of the tooth base,
which is more square than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* due to expansion
by increased osteocementum [@Kiprijanoff1881; @Maxwell2012d].
*Platypterygius australis* has a thin layer of acellular cementum, which
covers the enamel and orthodentine [@Maxwell2011]. The hyoids in
*Platypterygius australis* and *Platypterygius hercynicus* are very
similar in form to those of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* but each becomes
more rounded anteriorly [@Kear2005a; @Kolb2009]. The atlas-axis is fused
to the third cervical vertebrae in *Platypterygius platydactylus* and
some specimens of *Ichthyosaurus communis*
[@Broili1907; @Kear2003; @McGowan2003], unlike in *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* or any other species of *Platypterygius* or *Ichthyosaurus*.

In *Platypterygius australis,* the coracoid is small relative to the
other pectoral girdle bones, and the coracoids of other
ophthalmosaurids, and the anterolateral notch on the coracoid is reduced
in size to a shallow embayment [@Wade1984; @Zammit2010a]. The scapula of
*Platypterygius americanus* and *Platypterygius australis* is greatly
expanded proximally to form a broad triangular surface that narrows
greatly to the distal shaft [@Maxwell2010a; @Zammit2010a]. The dorsal
and ventral processes on the humerus of *Platypterygius* are massive and
strongly developed, larger than is found in any of the taxa described
above, with the ventral process often being larger and extending
distally for much of the length of the humerus. In the four taxa
described above, the dorsal and ventral processes on the humerus descend
into the humerus by about half of the proximodistal length of the
humerus. The humerus in *Platypterygius* may have between two and four
distal facets, with the ulnar facet being the largest, unlike in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
[[1.25](#fig:Oicenicus-forelimb){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-forelimb"}; @McGowan1972; @McGowan2003]:
*Platypterygius americanus* and *Platypterygius platydactylus* both have
two distal humeral facets articulating only with the radius and ulna
[@Broili1907; @Nace1939; @Maxwell2010a]; *Platypterygius australis*
possesses three distal humeral facets, although the anterior facet is
typically very small and articulates with an anterior accessory element
[@Wade1984; @Zammit2010a]; *Platypterygius hercynicus* has four distal
humeral facets, the posteriormost articulating with the pisiform
[@Kuhn1946; @Kolb2009]. *Platypterygius americanus, Platypterygius
australis, Platypterygius hercynicus,* and *Platypterygius
platydactylus* all have two or more pre-axial accessory digits that
extend the full length of the forelimb
[@Broili1907; @Motani1999; @Fernandez2001; @Kolb2009; @Zammit2010; @Zammit2010a];
in all these taxa, the elements take the form of the corresponding
primary digital elements. While *Platypterygius hercynicus* seems to
have a single post-axial accessory digit, *Platypterygius australis* has
three post-axial accessory digits, and *Platypterygius platydactylus*
and *Caypullisaurus bonapartei* both have two
[@Broili1907; @Fernandez2001; @Zammit2010a].

Like the humerus, the femur in *Platypterygius* is more massive than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[fig:Oicenicus-pelvis-hlimb,fig:Oicenicus-hlimb\]](#fig:Oicenicus-pelvis-hlimb,fig:Oicenicus-hlimb){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-pelvis-hlimb,fig:Oicenicus-hlimb"}): the dorsal
and ventral processes are much larger and extend along almost the entire
length of the femur [@Nace1939; @Kolb2009; @Maxwell2010a; @Zammit2010a].
Both of these processes are more plate-like in form and clearly offset
from the main body of the femur in *Platypterygius* than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. In *Platypterygius australis,* the femur has
three distal facets: the anterior facet articulates with a pre-axial
accessory element [@Wade1984; @Zammit2010a; @Maxwell2012c]. This is also
the case in *Platypterygius hercynicus,* but the similar size of the
distal facets suggests that the femur may have articulated with the
tibia, astragalus, and fibula (anterior to posterior) respectively
[@Kuhn1946; @Kolb2009]. The distal hindlimb elements in *Platypterygius*
are, like the distal forelimb elements, rectangular, becoming rounder
distally [@Maxwell2010a; @Zammit2010a], which is similar to the
polygonal elements in Early Jurassic taxa
[@McGowan1974; @McGowan1974a; @McGowan1979].

### *Sisteronia seeleyi* [Fischer *et al.*, -@Fischer2014a] {#tax:comp:Sseeleyi}

*Sisteronia seeleyi* [Fischer *et al.*, -@Fischer2014a] is known from
specimens from the Cambridge Greensand Member of the West Melbury Marly
Chalk Formation (Cenomanian) and the Gault Formation (Albian) of the
United Kingdom, and the Albian Vocontian Basin, France. Although the
remains are incomplete, this taxon has been included in Platypterygiinae
by @Fischer2014a [7].

In *Sisteronia seeleyi*, the quadrate has a well developed stapedial
facet surrounded by a bony ridge on the ventral portion of the pterygoid
lamella, developed more than in *Brachypterygius extremus* and
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* although this feature is variable. The
basisphenoid of *Sisteronia seeleyi* is massive, with elongate
basipterygoid processes that give the basisphenoid a markedly pentagonal
shape in dorsal or ventral view; this may be accentuated by crushing of
the holotype [@Fischer2014a]. Additionally, there is no clear groove for
the facial (VII) nerve posterior to the basipterygoid processes in
*Sisteronia seeleyi* that demarcate these processes from the main body,
as there is in *Brachypterygius extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*. The floor of the *foramen magnum* on the basioccipital has a
low dorsal process anteriorly in *Sisteronia seeleyi,* an autapomorphy
of the species, and well developed opisthotic facets, which are not
found in the taxa described above. As with other Platypterygiinae, the
extracondylar area is greatly reduced, and the ventral portion is not
visible in posterior view in *Sisteronia seeleyi,* similar to
*Brachypterygius extremus*
([\[fig:Bextremus-bocpos,fig:Bextremus-boclat,pl28\]](#fig:Bextremus-bocpos,fig:Bextremus-boclat,pl28){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Bextremus-bocpos,fig:Bextremus-boclat,pl28"}, figs 5--8),
but strongly reduced compared to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[fig:Oicenicus-basioccipital,pl10\]](#fig:Oicenicus-basioccipital,pl10){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-basioccipital,pl10"}). The teeth of *Sisteronia
seeleyi* have strongly compressed roots, with a rectangular
cross-section, rather than the square roots of *Brachypterygius
extremus* and, to a lesser extent, in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.
Finally, the humerus of *Sisteronia seeleyi* has a small posterior
distal facet for articulation with the pisiform that is not seen in the
taxa described above.

### *Stenopterygius* [Jaekel, -@Jaekel1904] {#tax:comp:Stenopterygius}

The genus *Stenopterygius* [Jaekel, -@Jaekel1904] is known from the
Toarcian--Aalenian of Germany and the United Kingdom. Following Maisch's
[-@Maisch2008b] revision, four species are present in this genus:
*Stenopterygius aaleniensis* [Maxwell *et al.*, -@Maxwell2012b] from the
Aalenian of south-western Germany, *Stenopterygius quadriscissus*
[Quenstedt, -@Quenstedt1858] from the Toarcian of south-western Germany
and possibly of northern Germany [@Maisch2004], *Stenopterygius
triscissus* [Quenstedt, -@Quenstedt1858] from the Toarcian of
south-western Germany and the United Kingdom, and *Stenopterygius
uniter* [Huene, -@Huene1931b] from the Toarcian of south-western
Germany. *Stenopterygius* has most recently been recovered within
Thunnosauria, and *Stenopterygius quadriscissus* defines the clade
Baracromia [Fischer *et al.*, -@Fischer2013a], which includes
Ophthalmosauridae. @Fernandez2007a included *Chacaicosaurus cayi*
[Fernández, -@Fernandez1994] from the Bajocian of Neuquén Province,
Argentina, within *Stenopterygius*, but phylogenetic analyses have found
*Chacaicosaurus cayi* to be separate from *Stenopterygius* [e.g.
@Fischer2013a], so it is retained as separate here.

The premaxilla in *Stenopterygius quadriscissus* is similar in size to
that of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* with typical values of 60% of the
length of the skull, but @Maxwell2012 has shown that this value varies
greatly between specimens. Contact between the lachrymal and premaxilla
is apparently variable, being present in *Stenopterygius quadriscissus*
but absent in *Stenopterygius triscissus*
[@Godefroit1993a; @Maisch2004]. The premaxillae of *Stenopterygius
uniter* exclude the nasals dorsally more posteriorly than in
*Brachypterygius extremus* or *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
[@Huene1931b; @Maisch2008b]. An unusual feature of *Stenopterygius
aaleniensis* not found in the British taxa described above is a narrow
contact between the postfrontal and nasal that splits the prefrontal
exposure into two parts: lateral and medial, although there is evidence
to suggest that this may occur in *Ichthyosaurus*
[@Motani2005a; @Maxwell2012d]. The frontal in *Stenopterygius
triscissus* and *Leptonectes* cf. *tenuirostris* is excluded from dorsal
view by the posterior extension of the nasals to contact the parietals,
allowing very little dorsal exposure of the frontals
[@Owen1881; @Godefroit1993a; @Maisch2003a]. This is greater than the
coverage in *Ichthyosaurus communis* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, but
similar to *Athabascasaurus bitumineus* (see
[\[tax:comp:Ichthyosaurus,tax:comp:Abitumineus\]](#tax:comp:Ichthyosaurus,tax:comp:Abitumineus){reference-type="ref"
reference="tax:comp:Ichthyosaurus,tax:comp:Abitumineus"};
[@Motani2005a; @Druckenmiller2010]). Like *Ichthyosaurus communis*
above, the anterior postfrontal is [Y]{.sans-serif}-shaped from the
interdigitating contacts between the anterior postfrontal and the nasal
and frontal, but is rounded in *Brachypterygius extremus* and
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [@Godefroit1993a; @Godefroit1994]. A
well-ossified sclerotic ring is a characteristic feature of
ichthyosaurs. In skulls that have not been laterally compressed,
Jurassic and Cretaceous ichthyosaurs show doming of the ring, as in
*'Ichthyosaurus latifrons'* [Owen, -@Owen1881] (pl. 27, fig. 1; =
*Stenopterygius triscissus*) and *Leptonectes* cf. *tenuirostris*
[@Maisch2003a figs 2 & 3]. In both of these ichthyosaurs, as well as
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* the sclerotic ring protrudes outside
(lateral to) the rim of the orbit. This may be compared to the
protrusion in the chameleon, but the sclerotic ring in this taxon is
much reduced and present only around the aperture itself: much of the
eyeball is not surrounded. The palatine in *Stenopterygius triscissus*
is also notched anteriorly on the midline where it forms the posterior
portion of the internal naris. The anterior extension medial to the
internal naris is reduced compared to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* as is
the contact with the vomer posteriorly
[@Seeley1880a; @Owen1881; @Baur1895a; @Godefroit1993a]. This is similar
to the palatine of *Temnodontosaurus platyodon,* although this latter
taxon has a relatively longer anterior process of the palatine than in
*Stenopterygius triscissus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
[@Godefroit1993]. Compared to both *Stenopterygius triscissus* and
*Temnodontosaurus platyodon,* the posterior portion of the palatine is
more irregular in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* as the contact with the
pterygoid is an interdigitating suture in the last taxon. In
*Stenopterygius triscissus* and *Temnodontosaurus platyodon,* the
posterior contact of the palatine with the pterygoid is simpler: the
pterygoid underlaps the palatine posteriorly
[@Seeley1880a; @Owen1881; @Baur1895a; @Godefroit1993; @Godefroit1993a].
In *Stenopterygius quadriscissus* and *Stenopterygius triscissus,* the
quadratojugal is larger than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* and may have
extensive posterior exposure [@Godefroit1993a; @Maisch2004; @Caine2011].

Although similar to that of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* the
interclavicle in *Stenopterygius* has a closer contact with the coracoid
dorsally. The suture between the two forms a strong ridge-and-groove
system [@Johnson1979]. The median stem on the interclavicle is also much
longer than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* extending along the entire
length of the intercoracoidal suture [@Caine2011; @Maxwell2012b]. The
clade Baracromia was erected by @Fischer2013a based upon the strong
development of the acromion process of the scapula found in
*Stenopterygius quadriscissus* and more derived ichthyosaurs. Many
non-baracromian neoichthyosaurians have straighter dorsal and proximal
margins to the scapula than the ingroup (compare *Ichthyosaurus* with
*Ophthalmosaurus*;
[1.6.12](#tax:comp:Ichthyosaurus){reference-type="ref"
reference="tax:comp:Ichthyosaurus"}).

The proximal humerus of *Stenopterygius* does not have a large and well
demarcated dorsal process, unlike in the later taxa described above
[@Fraas1891; @McGowan2003]; however, unlike in more basal
neoichthyosaurians, the ventral process is well developed, but not as
large as in *Brachypterygius extremus*. As in *Nannopterygius
enthekiodon,* the humerus of *Stenopterygius* has two distal facets that
articulate with the radius and ulna
[@Huene1931b; @McGowan2003; @Maisch2008b]. The distal humerus of
*Stenopterygius* is expanded relative to the proximal humerus, but does
not have the large anterodistal prominence of *Leptonectes* and
*Temnodontosaurus* [@Theodori1854; @Fraas1891; @Maisch2008b]. The
intermedium in *Stenopterygius* is straight distally, but may appear
pointed due to the variable size of the unequal distal intermedial
facets [@McGowan1979; @Maisch2008b; @Maxwell2012b]; distally, the
intermedium is pointed in both *Brachypterygius extremus* and
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* but is rounded in *Nannopterygius
enthekiodon*. Post-axial accessory elements are present in many
neoichthyosaurians, and they are well-known in *Ichthyosaurus,
Stenopterygius,* and *Temnodontosaurus*
[@Huene1922b; @McGowan1974; @McGowan1974a; @McGowan1979; @Motani1999; @Maisch2008b].
Many of these elements are distal ossifications that cannot be
considered digits as they are not supported proximally in the metacarpal
row, and so do not extend for any great length of the forelimb
[@Maxwell2012a]. Their occurrence may be a result of ossification of
these elements or variable preservation potential.

In *Stenopterygius* and more derived ichthyosaurs, the ilium has
essentially the same form as that found in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
[@Huene1952]. Fusion of the ischium and pubis is found only in
Neoichthyosauria, but only to a similar extent as found in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* within the clade Baracromia [@Fischer2013a].
The form of the ischiopubis is similar between *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* and *Stenopterygius,* although the latter possesses a
generally straighter distal margin [@Wiman1921; @McGowan2003]. An
anterior tibial notch is also found in the Lower Jurassic taxa
*Suevoleviathan* and *Stenopterygius* spp., among others
[@McGowan1979; @Maisch1998; @Caine2011; @Fischer2011; @Maxwell2012a].
Many Lower Jurassic taxa also have anterior notching on more distal
phalangeal elements, such as *Temnodontosaurus, Stenopterygius,* and
*Suevoleviathan* [@McGowan1974; @Caine2011; @Fischer2011; @Martin2012].
Notching in these taxa, and particularly in the numerous specimens of
*Ichthyosaurus* is highly variable in extent
[@McGowan1974a; @Bennett2012; @Maxwell2014].

### *Sveltonectes insolitus* [Fischer *et al.*, -@Fischer2011c] {#tax:comp:Sinsolitus}

*Sveltonectes insolitus* [Fischer *et al.*, -@Fischer2011c] from the
Barremian of the Ulyanovsk Region, Russia, is known from a single,
nearly complete specimen. In phylogenetic analyses, *Sveltonectes
insolitus* is typically recovered within Platypterygiinae as sister
taxon to *Aegirosaurus leptospondylus*
[@Fischer2011c; @Fischer2012; @Fischer2013a; @Roberts2014; @Arkhangelsky2014],
but was positioned within Ophthalmosauridae, close to both
*Brachypterygius extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* in the
analysis of @Motani2014a.

Similar to *Acamptonectes densus* above, in *Sveltonectes insolitus,*
the maxilla is covered extensively by the surrounding elements, so it is
only exposed in a narrow portion ventrally on the snout. The contact
between the premaxilla and lachrymal is more extensive than in
*Brachypterygius extremus,* and the corresponding exposure of the
maxilla is less in *Sveltonectes insolitus* than in the former species.
Unusually among ichthyosaurs, the external naris of *Sveltonectes
insolitus* has an elongate, hook-like descending process on the ventral
border of the naris, which is comparable to the external narial pillars
found in *Platypterygius australis* and *Simbirskiasaurus birjukovi*
[@Kear2005a; @Fischer2011c; @Fischer2014c]. Unlike in *Ichthyosaurus
communis* ([1.6.12](#tax:comp:Ichthyosaurus){reference-type="ref"
reference="tax:comp:Ichthyosaurus"}), the internasal foramen in
*Sveltonectes insolitus* is relatively tiny, placed further posteriorly
and is posteriorly enclosed by the frontals. Dorsally on the skull, the
frontal of *Sveltonectes insolitus* forms part of the margin to the
supratemporal fenestra, separating the parietal and postfrontal
contributions; this is not the case in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor"}), however, the preservation of
specimens of *Brachypterygius extremus* make the condition in that taxon
uncertain. The posterior end of the pterygoid of *Sveltonectes
insolitus* is developed into two prominent processes that are not found
in either *Brachypterygius extremus* or *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The
basisphenoid of *Sveltonectes insolitus* is trapezoidal, with reduced
basioccipital processes, smaller than in either *Brachypterygius
extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The dorsal surface of the
basisphenoid in *Sveltonectes insolitus* is extended posterolaterally on
each side to create a "kidney-shaped" surface [@Fischer2011c 1013],
which differs from the square dorsal surface of *Brachypterygius
extremus* and the rounded dorsal surface in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.
The prootic of *Sveltonectes insolitus* is pierced anteriorly by a
foramen just ventral to the midpoint that is not present in the taxa
described here. The exoccipital of *Sveltonectes insolitus* is unusual
among ophthalmosaurids [@Fischer2011c]: the anterior process is reduced
compared to other ophthalmosaurid taxa; there is a single large foramen
in the base, as in *Mollesaurus periallus*
[@Fernandez1999; @Fernandez2014]; and there is a groove dorsally that
separates the supraoccipital facet from a pillar-like process
posteriorly. As in other Platypterygiinae, the extracondylar area of the
basioccipital is reduced: in *Sveltonectes insolitus,* the extracondylar
area is similar in extent to *Brachypterygius extremus*. However, the
basioccipital of *Sveltonectes insolitus* differs from *Brachypterygius
extremus* in having a smaller anterior articular surface with a rounded
anteroventral fossa ventral to this articulation. Unlike in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* *Sveltonectes insolitus* does not have a
fossa surangularis on the surangular, and the angular has less lateral
exposure than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* more similar to
*Brachypterygius extremus*.

The distal ends of the transverse bar of the interclavicle in
*Sveltonectes insolitus* have posterodorsal extensions, rather than the
straight transverse form of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The coracoid of
*Sveltonectes insolitus* is triangular laterally where the scapular
facet is strongly angled anteriorly and separated from the glenoid
facet; this is similar to *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* and possibly to
*Brachypterygius extremus*. Additionally, the acromion process on the
scapula of *Sveltonectes insolitus* is large, narrow, and clearly
separated from the coracoid facet and the main body of the scapula; the
acromion process of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* is only demarcated from
the body of the scapula by its size, whereas in *Brachypterygius
extremus* the acromion process is continuous with the dorsal margin of
the scapula. The humerus of *Sveltonectes insolitus* has only two distal
facets -- as in *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* and Ophthalmosauridae
indet. described above -- that are equal in size, which differs from
both of the latter two taxa. Nonetheless, *Sveltonectes insolitus*
possesses one each of a complete pre-axial and post-axial accessory
digit, like in both *Brachypterygius extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*; the post-axial accessory digit is better developed in
*Sveltonectes insolitus* than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. The distal
manual elements of *Sveltonectes insolitus* are mostly polygonal except
for the most distal elements, of which there are more than in either
*Brachypterygius extremus* or *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.

The obturator foramen is lost entirely in the ischiopubis of
*Sveltonectes insolitus*. The femur of *Sveltonectes insolitus* has well
developed dorsal and ventral processes, and in particular, the dorsal
process is more robust than found in the femur of *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*. Both *Sveltonectes insolitus* and *Platypterygius australis*
have a pedal pre-axial accessory element; *Sveltonectes insolitus* also
has a post-axial accessory element, totalling five digits in the
hindlimb, neither of which are present in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.
While *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* shows a trend to reduction of the size
of the hindlimb elements and musculature; in *Sveltonectes insolitus*
and *Platypterygius australis,* this was perhaps not so strong when
compared to body size, and the total number of hindlimb elements. The
hindlimb of *Sveltonectes insolitus* possesses five digits, each with up
to 12 elements, many more than are know for *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*.

### *Temnodontosaurus* [Lydekker, -@Lydekker1889] {#tax:comp:Temnodontosaurus}

*Temnodontosaurus* [Lydekker, -@Lydekker1889] is a genus of basal
neoichthyosaurian from the Early Jurassic. Five species are present in
this genus: *Temnodontosaurus azerguensis* [Martin *et al.*,
-@Martin2012], *Temnodontosaurus eurycephalus* [McGowan, -@McGowan1974],
*Temnodontosaurus nuertingensis* [Huene, -@Huene1931], *Temnodontosaurus
platyodon* [Conybeare, -@Conybeare1822], and *Temnodontosaurus
trigonodon* [Theodori, -@Theodori1843].

The supranarial process of the premaxilla in *Temnodontosaurus
platyodon* extends farther along the dorsal border of the external naris
than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and *Brachypterygius extremus*
[@McGowan1974; @McGowan2003]. In *Temnodontosaurus platyodon* and
*Temnodontosaurus trigonodon,* the supratemporal develops a dorsolateral
flange that overlaps the squamosal externally [@Maisch2001]. There are
differences in the number of sclerotic plates present in the orbit, for
example, *Temnodontosaurus platyodon* has 13 plates compared to the 15
in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and 14 in *Brachypterygius extremus*
[@Home1814 pl. 17; @Owen1881 pl. 31, fig. 2; @McGowan2003 pl. 5]. In
*Temnodontosaurus trigonodon,* the quadratojugal forms a straight, but
more horizontal, ventral margin in which the dorsal process of the jugal
is weakly developed [@Maisch2001]; the ventral quadratojugal is covered
by the posterior dorsal process of the jugal in *Brachypterygius
extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. @Maxwell2012b, in their data
matrix, code *Temnodontosaurus platyodon* and *Temnodontosaurus
trigonodon* as having a poorly developed dorsal ramus of the jugal,
unlike most other neoichthyosaurians [@McGowan1974; @Maisch2001]. More
basal neoichthyosaurians, such as *Temnodontosaurus platyodon,* have a
shorter and more robust paroccipital process, directed laterally, than
in ophthalmosaurids [@Godefroit1993]. The exoccipital and stapedial
facets on the opisthotic of *Temnodontosaurus platyodon* proximally face
more medially than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* in which the stapedial
facet faces ventrally. *Temnodontosaurus* cf. *trigonodon* has a
dorsoventrally high supraoccipital that contributes little to the
*foramen magnum,* and is pierced by several foramina through the
posterior face of the arch [@Maisch2002b although this is a juvenile
specimen]. *Temnodontosaurus trigonodon, Temnodontosaurus platyodon,*
and *Ichthyosaurus communis* all have divergent anterior processes on
the supraoccipital, matched by the dorsal facet on the exoccipital
[@McGowan1973; @McGowan1974; @Godefroit1993; @Maisch2002b], whereas in
*Brachypterygius extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* the anterior
processes of the supraoccipital are aligned in parallel. Unlike in
Thunnosauria, more basal neoichthyosaurians, for example
*Temnodontosaurus* and *Suevoleviathan*, do not have clearly separated
rib heads, despite having two articulations proximally with the
vertebrae [@Huene1922b; @McGowan1979; @Maisch1998; @Maisch2000c
character 53]. The clavicles in *Ichthyosaurus* and *Temnodontosaurus*
are not as strongly deflected dorsally as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,*
and their posterior architecture is more generally concave
[@Owen1881; @McGowan1974; @McGowan1974a; @McGowan1994b]; this is due
largely to the lack of a prominent acromion process of the
anteroproximal scapula. In *Temnodontosaurus,* the obturator foramen is
broader than in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* resulting in the anterior
margin of the ischium being emarginated [@Owen1881].

### *Thalattoarchon saurophagis* [Fröbisch *et al.*, -@Frobisch2013] {#thalattoarchon-saurophagis-fröbisch-et-al.}

*Thalattoarchon saurophagis* [Fröbisch *et al.*, -@Frobisch2013] is
known from a partial skull and postcranial material from the Favret
Formation (Anisian) of Favret Canyon, Augusta Mountains, Nevada, USA. It
was recovered as sister to Merriamosauria by @Frobisch2013, but only
brief comparisons are made here as it is similar to more basal
ichthyosaurs.

The supratemporal is a relatively smaller component of the posterior
skull in *Thalattoarchon saurophagis* and *Utatsusaurus hataii* than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* as it forms only the posterior border of the
temporal fenestra in these taxa. *Thalattoarchon saurophagis,
Utatsusaurus hataii,* and other taxa, also have a noticeably
anteriorly-directed medial ramus that, along with long posterior
processes of the parietals, forms a deep emargination of the dorsal
margin of the posterior skull [@Motani1998a; @Frobisch2013].
*Thalattoarchon saurophagis* shows a slightly different configuration of
the supratemporal fenestra to more basal and derived Ichthyosauriformes
[@Frobisch2013]: the squamosal is likely included in the border of the
supratemporal fenestra, and the frontal is developed posteriorly and
separates the postfrontal and parietal at the anterior of the fenestra;
in most other ichthyosaurs, the squamosal is excluded from the border of
the supratemporal fenestra. *Thalattoarchon saurophagis, Himalayasaurus
tibetensis* [Young & Dong, -@Young1972], and some examples of
*Temnodontosaurus platyodon* and *Temnodontosaurus trigonodon* have
laterally (labiolingually) compressed teeth
[@Theodori1843; @McGowan1994b; @Motani1999a; @McGowan2003; @Frobisch2013]:
Massare's [-@Massare1987] 'cut' guild.

### *Undorosaurus* [Efimov, -@Efimov1999a] {#tax:comp:Undorosaurus}

The original description of *Undorosaurus* [Efimov, -@Efimov1999a]
presented several species, but these have typically been synonymised
with the type species, *Undorosaurus gorodischensis* [Efimov,
-@Efimov1999a], since [e.g. @McGowan2003; @Maisch2010]. Available
material is limited to teeth, vertebral, pectoral, forelimb, pelvic, and
hindlimb elements from the middle Volgian (Tithonian) of Ulyanovsk
Region, Russia. Recently, *Undorosaurus gorodischensis* has been
included in phylogenetic analyses, which find it to be either a basal
ophthalmosaurid [@Roberts2014], or a derived ophthalmosaurine in a
polytomy with *Acamptonectes densus, Cryopterygius kristiansenae,
Ophthalmosaurus icenicus, Ophthalmosaurus natans,* and
*Paraophthalmosaurus* [@Arkhangelsky2014]. *Undorosaurus trautscholdi*
[Arkhangelsky & Zverkov, -@Arkhangelsky2014] was described from an
incomplete forelimb from the upper Volgian (Tithonian--Berriasian) of
Moscow, Russia.

The coracoids of *Undorosaurus gorodischensis* have well developed
anterior medial processes, similar to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,*
however, the scapular facet of the coracoid is not so large as in the
latter taxon. Posteriorly, the margin of the coracoid is rounded and not
angled obliquely as in *Nannopterygius enthekiodon*. In the specimens
referred to *Undorosaurus* by @Efimov1999a, the scapula has a similar
variability to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* particularly in the variable
development of the acromion process proximally. The humeri of both
*Undorosaurus gorodischensis* and *Undorosaurus trautscholdi* are robust
like *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* but not so anteroposteriorly elongate
distally as in both *Brachypterygius extremus* and *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus*. In *Undorosaurus trautscholdi,* there are four distal humeral
facets: an additional posterior facet articulates with the pisiform,
which is located posterior to the ulna. This condition is similar to
*Brachypterygius extremus,* although the pisiform is not so well
developed in this taxon, and *Undorosaurus trautscholdi* has an
additional post-axial accessory element that articulates with the
posterodistal ulna, as does the pisiform of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
in the interpretation above
([\[fig:Oicenicus-flimbdor\]](#fig:Oicenicus-flimbdor){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-flimbdor"}). In *Undorosaurus gorodischensis,*
the pisiform has a broad contact with the posterodistal ulna, larger
than in both *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and *Undorosaurus trautscholdi*
[@Arkhangelsky2014]. The forelimb epipodials of *Undorosaurus
trautscholdi* are more angular and in closer contact than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* with well define facets between them; more
distal elements become rounded and more separate. The ischiopubis of
*Undorosaurus gorodischensis* differs markedly from *Ophthalmosaurus
icenicus* in its lack of distal fusion between the two bones, enclosing
the obturator 'foramen' only proximally.

Discussion
----------

### *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* in the Kimmeridge Clay?[\[OicenicusKimmClay\]]{#OicenicusKimmClay label="OicenicusKimmClay"}

To date, there is no conclusive evidence for the presence of
*Ophthalmosaurus* in the Kimmeridge Clay Formation of Britain. Records
of this taxon have mostly been founded on humeral material, which, due
to the number of more recently identified ophthalmosaurid taxa, is now
non-diagnostic at this level (see
[1.5.2](#Taxainvalida){reference-type="ref" reference="Taxainvalida"};
[@Fischer2011c]). @Cope1967 [10] claimed to have found the anterior part
of a skeleton of *Ophthalmosaurus*, and further remains have been found
at Westbury [@Grange1996]. Assignment of the material is not helped by
its generally incomplete and often fragmentary nature.

Perhaps the most likely example of *Ophthalmosaurus* is NHMUK PV 41237,
from the Kimmeridge Clay Formation of Weymouth, which includes several
skull elements that are consistent with the above diagnosis for
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*; this does, however, represent a juvenile.
Several basioccipitals provide strong indication that *Ophthalmosaurus*
is present as they possess the following combination of characters
unique to this taxon: (1) partly reduced extracondylar area
(ophthalmosaurine synapomorphy, excluding Platypterygiinae;
[@Fischer2014 66]); (2) articular condyle clearly offset from
extracondylar area (excludes *Mollesaurus periallus*; [@Fernandez2014
51]); (3) no deep anterior fossa (excludes *Mollesaurus periallus*;
[@Fernandez2014 51]); (4) left and right extracondylar areas separated
by a ridge ventrally (excludes *Acamptonectes densus* and *Leninia
stellans*; [@Fischer2012 12--13]; [@Fischer2014 66]). These characters
are found in OUMNH J12450 and J12451, among others. Separation of
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* from *Ophthalmosaurus natans* based on this
element is not possible. However, the description of @Gilmore1905
suggests that the ventral portion of the extracondylar area may be
larger in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* than in *Ophthalmosaurus natans*.
The morphology of the basioccipitals in *Cryopterygius kristiansenae*
and *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* is currently unknown beyond being of
the "typical ophthalmosaurid condition" (see
[\[NenthekiodonSkull\]](#NenthekiodonSkull){reference-type="ref"
reference="NenthekiodonSkull"}; [@Druckenmiller2012a 317]).

Attempting to characterise and separate humeri is difficult, although
*Cryopterygius kristiansenae* and *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* can be
excluded immediately (see
[\[NenthekiodonHumerus\]](#NenthekiodonHumerus){reference-type="ref"
reference="NenthekiodonHumerus"}; [@Druckenmiller2012a]). Humeral
morphology of ophthalmosaurines within Ophthalmosauridae is generally
similar, but separate from Platypterygiinae [@Fischer2011c].
@Fischer2012 [tbl. 2] attempted to separate *Acamptonectes densus* using
the ratio "length of AAE \[anterior accessory element\] facet/length of
radial facet", but their values (*c.* 27%--32%), while generally lower,
fall in the range for humeri referable to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[tbl:Oicenicus-humfacet-measurements\]](#tbl:Oicenicus-humfacet-measurements){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:Oicenicus-humfacet-measurements"}). The humeri of
*Mollesaurus periallus* and *Leninia stellans* are unknown
[@Fernandez2014; @Fischer2014]. The form of the humerus in
*Arthropterygius chrisorum* is also different enough to exclude this
taxon: the dorsal and ventral processes are reduced compared to
*Ophthalmosaurus* [@Maxwell2010]. Following these comparisons, it is
likely that at least some of the humeri represent *Ophthalmosaurus*, but
again, it is not possible to distinguish whether these are
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* or *Ophthalmosaurus natans* (see
[\[synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon\]](#synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon){reference-type="ref"
reference="synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon"}). In conclusion, it is
highly probable that *Ophthalmosaurus*, or a very similar form, was
present in the Kimmeridge Clay Formation of Britain, but identification
to species level is not possible with the incomplete and fragmentary
material available.

![Outline reconstructions of the skull of *Ophthalmosaurus*
'*Baptanodon*' *natans* [Marsh, -@Marsh1879] from the Sundance
Formation, Wyoming, USA in right lateral (**a**), dorsal (**b**),
ventral (**c**) and posterior (**d**) views. Compare with
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*
([\[fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof-palate\]](#fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof-palate){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-skull-latdor,fig:Oicenicus-ventralskullroof-palate"}).
Redrawn from @Gilmore1905 [@Gilmore1906]. Scale bar represents 250 mm.
[\[fig:Baptanodon-skull\]]{#fig:Baptanodon-skull
label="fig:Baptanodon-skull"}](./img/fig-Baptanodon-skull-outlines.pdf){#fig:Baptanodon-skull
width="\\textwidth"}

### Synonymy of *Ophthalmosaurus* and *Baptanodon*[\[synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon\]]{#synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon label="synonymyOphthalmosaurusBaptanodon"}

The first ichthyosaur remains from the Middle or Upper Jurassic of the
USA were described by @Marsh1879 from the '*Sauranodon* Beds' (later
'*Baptanodon* Beds') of Wyoming, and named *Sauranodon natans* [Marsh,
-@Marsh1879]. This material included several skulls and later a limb
separated as *Sauranodon discus* [Marsh, -@Marsh1880a]. Recent work has
placed the source of many of these, and later, specimens as the Redwater
Shale Member, Sundance Formation of Wyoming [@Massare2006], which has an
Upper Jurassic age (Lower--Middle Oxfordian:
[@Imlay1982; @Kvale2001; @Massare2014a]). @Marsh1880a erroneously
identified the limb he described as a hindlimb, although its form is
essentially identical to the *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* forelimb
described by @Seeley1874. @Gilmore1905 corrected the identification of
this material as the forelimb. @Marsh1880b, later realising the genus
*Sauranodon* was preoccupied, amended this to *Baptanodon* [Marsh,
-@Marsh1880b]. @Baur1887 [@Baur1887a] and @Lydekker1888 considered the
remains of *Baptanodon* to be similar enough to *Ophthalmosaurus* as to
be synonymous. @Lydekker1889 later considered the absence of teeth in
specimens of *Baptanodon* to be enough to separate *Baptanodon* and
*Ophthalmosaurus* once more. New specimens of *Baptanodon* from Wyoming
described by @Gilmore1902 had teeth associated with them and placed *in
situ*. Gilmore suggested that *Baptanodon* and *Ophthalmosaurus* might
be congeneric, but was uncertain that the specimen was truly referable
to *Baptanodon* and so erected *Microdontosaurus petersonii* [Gilmore,
-@Gilmore1902] in the interim. @Gilmore1903 later described teeth and
alveolar grooves in the type specimens of *Baptanodon* following
additional preparation, an important discovery that had to be repeated
later by @Holland1908, as several authors had missed Gilmore's notice.
He thus abandoned *Microdontosaurus petersonii*, but refrained from
formally synonymising *Ophthalmosaurus* and *Baptanodon* pending
discovery of distinguishing characters. In his comparison of
*Baptanodon* and *Ophthalmosaurus*, @Knight1903 named the species
*Baptanodon marshi* [Knight, -@Knight1903] and identified the following
characters in *Baptanodon*: (1) reduced or absent interclavicle, (2) no
intercentrum between vertebrae two and three, (3) large medial facets on
the coracoids (intercoracoidal facets) and (4) more robust limbs. None
of these are unique to *Baptanodon*, character (1) is not valid, neither
do they adequately separate that genus from *Ophthalmosaurus*.

@Gilmore1905 [@Gilmore1906] made the first complete description and
taxonomic review of *Baptanodon*
([1.36](#fig:Baptanodon-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Baptanodon-skull"}). He identified (p. 126) three
characters in *Baptanodon* to separate the two genera: (1) clavicles
meet medially without suture, (2) amphicoelous anterior cervical
vertebrae and (3) a sixth digit, dismissing the features that Knight had
previously identified (pp 118--120). Again, these characters do not
justify a generic separation between *Baptanodon* and *Ophthalmosaurus*:
only the first character is a valid difference. He also erected
*Baptanodon robustus* [Gilmore, -@Gilmore1906]. A further specimen
described by @Gilmore1907 and named as *Baptanodon reedi* [Gilmore,
-@Gilmore1907] brought the number of species within *Baptanodon* to
five: *Baptanodon natans, Baptanodon discus, Baptanodon marshi,
Baptanodon robustus,* and *Baptanodon reedi*.

@Andrews1907, in preparation of his catalogue of the Leeds Collection of
marine reptiles, noticed the large amount of variation present between
specimens referred to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and the ensuing errors
in description and reconstruction. Here, and later [@Andrews1910], he
considered the overlap in form between *Baptanodon* and
*Ophthalmosaurus*, and the lack of distinguishing characters, to
preclude separation of the two genera. @Williston1914 admitted the
similarity but listed figures as "*Baptanodon* (*Ophthalmosaurus*)"
(e.g. captions to figs 54, 55). The congeneric status was accepted by
@Huene1922b, but he listed only two of the above five species of
*Baptanodon* as valid: *Ophthalmosaurus natans* and *Ophthalmosaurus
discus*, as did @Kuhn1934.

to *Baptanodon* & *Ophthalmosaurus*\
Most of the foramen magnum is formed by the supraoccipital. & Most of
the foramen magnum is formed by the exoccipitals.\
Parietals wrap round the supraoccipital & extend downwards almost to the
exoccipital. & The parietals diverge away from the supraoccipital only
touching it on the dorsal side.\
The supratemporal meets the parietal close to the supraoccipital. & The
supratemporal meets the parietal over the distal end of the opisthotic.\
The opening between the opisthotic, exoccipital, supraoccipital,
parietal & supratemporal is small. & The opening between the opisthotic,
exoccipital, supraoccipital, parietal & supratemporal is large.\
The opening between the stapes & opisthotic passes sharply inwards. &
There is a large opening enclosed by the stapes, opisthotic,
supratemporal & quadrate.\
The skull is little wider than high. & The skull is much wider than
high.\

\

The issue was revisited by @Appleby1956 as he re-described the occipital
and otic regions of the skull of British *Ophthalmosaurus* material.
Appleby identified several new characters of the skull that he posited
could more reliably separate *Baptanodon* and *Ophthalmosaurus*
([\[tbl:Appleby-OiOn-characters\]](#tbl:Appleby-OiOn-characters){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:Appleby-OiOn-characters"}). These characters, Appleby
claimed, are important as they are discrete states, not the extremes of
continuous variation. As they refer to the structure of the occipital
region and jaw articulation, he thus considered them significant at the
generic, rather than specific level. Kirton's [-@Kirton1983 p. 12]
review found the two genera congeneric, dismissing all of Appleby's
characters as the result of inaccurate reconstructions (see below and
[1.36](#fig:Baptanodon-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Baptanodon-skull"}). This view was upheld by later
authors [e.g. @Maisch2000c; @McGowan2003]. Most recently, phylogenetic
analyses have found *Ophthalmosaurus* (as represented by
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and *Ophthalmosaurus natans*) to be
paraphyletic with respect to other taxa. The analyses of
@Druckenmiller2010 and @Fischer2013a included 10 characters with
different codings between the two taxa
([\[tbl:OiOn-phylochar\]](#tbl:OiOn-phylochar){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:OiOn-phylochar"}). Other similar analyses have shown
these Ophthalmosauridae ingroup-clades to be unstable, prone to wander
and to often collapse in strict consensus [e.g.
@Druckenmiller2014; @Fischer2014].

to & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* & *Ophthalmosaurus natans* & Reference\
& Premaxilla--lachrymal contact ventral to external nares. & narrow &
absent & DM2\
2 & Anterior margin of jugal. & broad and fan-like & tapering & DM6\
3 & Prefrontal--external narial contact. & present & absent & DM7\
4 & Frontal participation in temporal fenestra in dorsal view. &
extensive & small or absent & DM9\
5 & Dentition ornamentation: ridges enamelled. & coarsely & coarsely,
lightly or smooth \[states 0&1\] & DM25, F1\
6 & Base of enamel layer definition. & well defined, precise & poorly
defined, invisible & F2\
7 & Neural spines of atlas & axis fusion. & never, separate & maybe,
overlapping & DM26, F28\
8 & Posterior dorsal--anterior caudal centra height/length ratio. & ≥4 &
≤3.5 & DM28, F26\
9 & Glenoid contribution of scapula. & extensive, larger than the
coracoid facet & reduced, smaller than the coracoid facet & F35\
10 & Protruding deltopectoral crest. & present and large, as high as the
dorsal trochanter & present & F39\

\

The first three of Appleby's [-@Appleby1956] characters are the result
of variation in the ossification of the supratemporal, which may vary
greatly in shape (see
[\[OicenicusSupratemporal\]](#OicenicusSupratemporal){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusSupratemporal"}). @Gilmore1905 [pl. 11] showed that
his specimen ( CMNH 878;
[1.36](#fig:Baptanodon-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Baptanodon-skull"}) has been obliquely compressed, which
may have affected the position and extent of the parietal. In comparison
with Appleby's [-@Appleby1956 fig. 2 B] reconstruction, the
reconstruction presented above
([\[fig:Oicenicus-occipital\]](#fig:Oicenicus-occipital){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:Oicenicus-occipital"}) reduces the disparity between the
two taxa in this region. Appleby's [-@Appleby1956] last three characters
are again resolved by amending the reconstruction. In particular, he did
not correctly articulate the distal end of the opisthotic with the true
facet on the supratemporal, instead locating it at the apex between the
medial and ventral rami [@Appleby1956 p. 413]. This results in the
lowering and widening of the skull generally and the spreading of the
posterior fenestrae in the occipital--otic region. The relative
composition of the *foramen magnum* (supraoccipital or exoccipital
dominated) appears to be a valid character [@Maxwell2012b].

Phylogenetic analyses have added a few characters
([\[tbl:OiOn-phylochar\]](#tbl:OiOn-phylochar){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:OiOn-phylochar"}) that shall be discussed. Character 1:
in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, the contact between the premaxilla and
lachrymal is a small overlap, whereas in *Ophthalmosaurus natans,* these
two bones are narrowly separated. Character 2: the anterior ramus of the
jugal is broader in many ophthalmosaurids but varies within other taxa,
as in *Stenopterygius* and *Temnodontosaurus*. Character 3: as with
character 1, the contact between the prefrontal and external naris is
small in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. Character 4: the frontals do not
have an extensive participation in the supratemporal fenestra in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* (see
[\[OicenicusFrontal,fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor\]](#OicenicusFrontal,fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusFrontal,fig:Oicenicus-skull-dor"}). Character 5: the
state in *Ophthalmosaurus natans* is more variable than in
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, therefore there is overlap between these two
taxa. The above characters are minor differences between these two taxa
that may separate *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and *Ophthalmosaurus
natans* in a phylogenetic analysis due to the definitions of the
characters and states. Characters 6--9: these are valid characters to
separate the two taxa. Character 10: the deltopectoral crest (ventral
process) appears to be as large and well developed in *Ophthalmosaurus
natans* as in *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, although it may be directed
more anteriorly in the former reducing its apparent size
[@Knight1903; @Gilmore1905]. These characters, as is the recent
consensus, best represent differences at the species level and do not
provide support for the separation of the genera *Ophthalmosaurus* and
*Baptanodon*. Further study of material referred to *Ophthalmosaurus
natans*, and more character and taxonomically inclusive phylogenetic
analyses will be integral to fully resolving this.

![Global palaeogeography in the Middle and Late Jurassic (simplified
from [@Blakey2008; @Blakey2014]) with ichthyosaur occurrence data from
the Paleobiology Database (downloaded 31^st^ January 2014;
[@Alroy2013; @Alroy2013a]) and @Bardet2014. Middle Jurassic ichthyosaur
occurrences are plotted on a palaeogeographical map of the Bajocian
(*c*. 170 Ma: **a**) and Late Jurassic ichthyosaur occurrences are
plotted on a palaeogeographical map of the Tithonian (c. 150 Ma: **b**).
Lines of latitude are at 30° intervals. Ichthyosaur remains identified
to generic and species level are indicated. Abbreviations: **Ae**,
*Aegirosaurus leptospondylus*; **Ac**, *Arthropterygius chrisorum*;
**Ar**, *Arthropterygius* sp.; **B**, *Brachypterygius* sp.; **Ba**,
'*Brachypterygius alekseevi*'; **Be**, *Brachypterygius extremus*;
**Ca**, *Caypullisaurus bonapartei*; **Cc**, *Chacaicosaurus cayi*;
**Cr**, *Cryopterygius kristiansenae*; **Mp**, *Mollesaurus periallus*;
**N**, *Nannopterygius enthekiodon*; **Oi**, *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*;
**On**, *Ophthalmosaurus natans*; **Os**, *Ophthalmosaurus
saveljeviensis*; **Oy**, *Ophthalmosaurus yasykovi*; **P**, *Palvennia
hoybergeti*; **Sa**, *Stenopterygius aaleniensis*; **Ug**, *Undorosaurus
gorodischensis*; question marks indicate uncertainty; unlabelled
occurrences are not identifiable to genus level or lower.
[\[fig:MLJichthyosaur-pbgeog\]]{#fig:MLJichthyosaur-pbgeog
label="fig:MLJichthyosaur-pbgeog"}](./img/fig-MLJichthyosaur-palaeobiogeography.pdf "fig:"){#fig:MLJichthyosaur-pbgeog}
[\[fig:MJichthyosaur-pbgeog\]]{#fig:MJichthyosaur-pbgeog
label="fig:MJichthyosaur-pbgeog"}
[\[fig:LJichthyosaur-pbgeog\]]{#fig:LJichthyosaur-pbgeog
label="fig:LJichthyosaur-pbgeog"}

### Palaeobiogeography of Middle and Late Jurassic ichthyosaurs[\[tax:palaeobiogeography\]]{#tax:palaeobiogeography label="tax:palaeobiogeography"}

In the Middle and Late Jurassic, ichthyosaurs had a wide distribution.
Occurrences have been recorded on almost every continent and
continuously between the high northern and southern latitudes
([1.37](#fig:MLJichthyosaur-pbgeog){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MLJichthyosaur-pbgeog"}). The relative abundance of
material from Europe and the USA is dominated by historical collections.
However, more recent finds have greatly extended this range to
Spitsbergen, Norway; Russia; Mexico, and Argentina
[@McGowan2003; @Gasparini2005; @Druckenmiller2012a; @Frey2014].

While ichthyosaur diversity was thought to be lower in the Middle and
Late Jurassic than in the Early Jurassic [@Fernandez1997], recent finds
and taxonomic revision have increased this somewhat. The earliest
diagnostic ichthyosaur remains from the Middle--Upper Jurassic series
are known from the Aalenian of south-western Germany
([\[fig:MJichthyosaur-pbgeog\]](#fig:MJichthyosaur-pbgeog){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MJichthyosaur-pbgeog"}), representing the baracromian
ichthyosaur *Stenopterygius aaleniensis* [@Maxwell2012b]. Further
Aalenian--Bajocian remains are known from Patagonia, Argentina,
including *Chacaicosaurus cayi*, sister taxon to Ophthalmosauridae
[*sensu* @Fischer2011c], and *Mollesaurus periallus* [@Fernandez2014].
More basal, non-ophthalmosaurid ichthyosaurs gradually reduced in
diversity through the Toarcian--Bajocian, however, the basal
thunnosaurian *Malawania anachronus* is known from the Early Cretaceous
[@Fischer2013a]. The most basal ophthalmosaurid, *Arthropterygius
chrisorum*, is, however, only certainly known from the
Oxfordian--Kimmeridgian of Melville Island, Canada, then at the edge of
the Boreal Ocean, suggesting a ghost range from the Aalenian--Oxfordian
[@Russell1993; @Maxwell2010; @Fischer2013a]. Additional material is
referred to this genus from the Late Jurassic of Argentina
([\[fig:LJichthyosaur-pbgeog\]](#fig:LJichthyosaur-pbgeog){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:LJichthyosaur-pbgeog"}; [@Fernandez2012]). These data
suggest that Ophthalmosauridae originated in the south-eastern part of
the Pacific Ocean in the Aalenian--earliest Bajocian [@Fernandez2003],
with occurrences of ophthalmosaurids in the Tethys Ocean by the
Bathonian [@Delair1985]. An ophthalmosaurine ophthalmosaurid ichthyosaur
from the Early Bajocian of Alaska indicates that both divergence of the
two ophthalmosaurid subclades (Ophthalmosaurinae and Platypterygiinae)
and widespread dispersal occurred rapidly [@Druckenmiller2014]. This
rapid dispersal is not surprising considering the morphological and
physiological adaptations of thunniform ichthyosaurs to long distance,
open ocean travel [@Bernard2010; @Bardet2014].

In the Callovian--Tithonian (Portlandian), most ichthyosaur diversity,
along with most specimens, is concentrated in the peri-Tethyan region.
Finds of *Ophthalmosaurus* -- *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* between western
Europe and Mexico [@Buchy2010a], *Ophthalmosaurus natans* in the USA,
and *Ophthalmosaurus yasykovi* and *Ophthalmosaurus saveljeviensis* in
western Russia -- support interchange along much of the western portion
of the Tethys Ocean and through the 'Hispanic Corridor' into the Pacific
Ocean [@Bardet2014]. Specimens referred to *Brachypterygius* are known
from the eastern part of the Tethys Ocean, the Boreal Ocean, and Mexico
[@Arkhangelsky2000; @Buchy2009; @Angst2010], with likely transfer along
the 'Viking Corridor' [@Bardet2014]. However, the preservation and
incomplete nature of SESNE 2010.0.1 casts doubt on its referral to
*Brachypterygius* sp.: no diagnostic features are found in this specimen
(see [\[BextremusDiagnosis\]](#BextremusDiagnosis){reference-type="ref"
reference="BextremusDiagnosis"}). Europe, at this time, was positioned
at the confluence of the southern end of the 'Viking Corridor' with the
western Tethys Ocean
([\[fig:LJichthyosaur-pbgeog\]](#fig:LJichthyosaur-pbgeog){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:LJichthyosaur-pbgeog"}): this exchange and the relatively
shallow, productive seas here may explain the comparatively high numbers
of marine reptiles present. Finds of ichthyosaur material in the Late
Jurassic of Madagascar and South America show that, by the Tithonian,
there existed a clear transfer route through the 'Mozambique Channel'
[@Bardet2014]. Possible finds of *Brachypterygius* suggest this
wide-ranging taxon had extended its range to Gondwana [@Fernandez1997],
but these materials are also non-diagnostic (see
[\[BrachypterygiusDiscussion\]](#BrachypterygiusDiscussion){reference-type="ref"
reference="BrachypterygiusDiscussion"}). Jurassic ichthyosaurs from
eastern Gondwana are almost unknown: despite there being a comparatively
good Cretaceous record, little of this represents appropriate facies for
ichthyosaur remains [@Zammit2010; @Zammit2011]. Material from Antarctica
is rare and often too poorly preserved to be certain of the presence of
ichthyosaurs [@Whitham1989; @Hikuroa2009]. The recent finds of Upper
Jurassic--Lower Cretaceous ichthyosaurs from Spitsbergen show a clear
ability to survive cold-water palaeoenvironments [@Druckenmiller2012a].
These, and other specimens from palaeolatitudes north of 60° N and south
of 60° S [@Whitham1989; @Zammit2011], support previous hypotheses on the
thermoregulatory capabilities of marine reptiles [@Bernard2010]. Despite
the presence of the 'Viking Corridor' between Spitsbergen and the United
Kingdom, there is no species overlap between these two localities
[@Angst2010; @Druckenmiller2012a]. Into the Cretaceous, the diversity of
ichthyosaurs remains similar to the Late Jurassic. Taxonomic reappraisal
is altering this hypothesis, but ichthyosaurs retain their worldwide
distribution [@McGowan2003; @Fischer2014a].

A new phylogeny of ichthyosaurs (Reptilia: Diapsida) {#chapter2}
====================================================

::: {.epigraph}
The rushes are strangely rustling,\
The ocean uncannily gleams,\
As with tears in his eyes down gushing,\
An *Ichthyosaurus* swims.

Joseph Victor von Scheffels\
The *Ichthyosaurus*, translated by Charles Godfrey Leland
:::

[ABSTRACT]{.sans-serif}

The largest phylogenetic analysis of ichthyosaurs to date is presented,
with 107 ingroup taxa. Maximum parsimony analysis found a poorly
resolved consensus tree that was improved by *a priori* safe taxonomic
removal and *a posteriori* pruning of unstable taxa. Tree resolution was
reduced more by taxa that lacked codings from phylogenetically important
regions of the skeleton, rather than by those that simply lacked many
codings. Because it has been difficult to recover a completely resolved
tree, additional methods of phylogeny reconstruction were investigated:
implied weights parsimony and maximum likelihood. While the resultant
topologies were similar in all analyses, recovery of clades and the
positions of taxa did vary; the maximum parsimony analysis is preferred.
Ichthyosaur phylogeny consists of a series of nested clades, each marked
by several character changes with taxa forming a series of grades across
ichthyosaur evolution. Unequivocal clades include Mixosauridae,
Parvipelvia, and Ophthalmosauridae. The preferred phylogeny also
recovers the clades Eoichthyosauria, Ichthyosauria, Merriamosauria,
Shastasauria, Euichthyosauria, Parvipelvia, Neoichthyosauria, and
Ophthalmosauridae. Support for many clades is low, and resampling does
not match necessarily high decay indices for any clade, and vice versa.
Definitions of Mixosauridae and Ophthalmosauridae are modified to
stem-based definitions to prevent substantial variation of included
taxa. Internal division of Ophthalmosauridae into Ophthalmosaurinae and
Platypterygiinae is recovered, but taxa are distributed differently to
that found by previous studies. Several genera are not monophyletic:
*Platypterygius, Ophthalmosaurus, Brachypterygius, Stenopterygius,
Leptonectes, Temnodontosaurus, Guizhouichthyosaurus, Mixosaurus,* and
*Phalarodon*. Complex and variable relationships suggest the need for
new characters and a reevaluation of the state of ichthyosaur
phylogenetics.

Introduction {#sys:Introduction}
------------

Ichthyosaurs are members of a clade of marine reptiles known from the
earliest Triassic through to the early Late Cretaceous [@McGowan2003].
Their relative commonness, compared to other marine reptile groups,
longevity, and worldwide distribution means that they are a diverse and
well-known group. There are currently 108 valid species in 65 genera,
with some taxa represented by several hundreds or thousands of
specimens -- e.g. *Ichthyosaurus* and *Stenopterygius* [@Maisch2000c] --
although most are known from less substantial remains [@Cleary2015].
Ichthyosaurs rapidly and completely adapted to the marine realm early in
their evolution. Even the earliest known ichthyosaurs show many derived
characters: paddle-like limbs; elongate, streamlined body; partial
development of a tail bend and fluke; and viviparity
[@Motani1999; @Motani2005; @Motani2014]. Rapid diversification through
the Triassic led to their occupying many niches, resulting in disparate
forms [@Camp1980; @Massare1987; @Sander2011; @Motani2013]. Jurassic
ichthyosaurs are historically important as one of the earliest
recognised extinct groups [@Howe1981; @Torrens1995].

Most recent work has concerned the taxonomy of ichthyosaurs: many taxa
were originally described over a century ago, and so are in need of
revision [@McGowan2003]. However, the interrelationships of ichthyosaurs
have also been investigated with descriptions of new species
[@Fischer2013a; @Roberts2014]. Increasingly, macroevolutionary trends
within the group are being considered, including palaeobiogeography
[@Bardet2014], diversification and extinction rates
[@Fischer2012; @Fischer2013a], response to extinction events
[@Thorne2011], and ecology [@Sander2011; @Frobisch2013; @Motani2013].
Despite this, there has been no recent attempt to include all taxa in a
single phylogenetic analysis; this is the purpose of the current study.

Numerical cladistic analyses have been performed on ichthyosaurs for
three decades [@Mazin1982], and computational analyses for almost two
decades [@Caldwell1996]. The largest studies included taxa only to
generic level [@Motani1999c; @Maisch2000c; @Sander2000; @Motani2014a],
but have since had taxa and characters added or modified
[@Sander2011; @Thorne2011; @Cuthbertson2013; @Cuthbertson2013a; @Frobisch2013].
Many analyses have focused upon ichthyosaur subclades, including
Shastasauria [@Nicholls2001], Mixosauridae [@Jiang2005a; @Jiang2006],
Parvipelvia [@Maxwell2012b; @Fischer2013a], and Thunnosauria and
Ophthalmosauridae
[@Fernandez2007; @Druckenmiller2010; @Druckenmiller2014; @Fischer2012; @Arkhangelsky2014; @Fischer2014; @Roberts2014].

This study aims to

present an inclusive phylogenetic analysis of ichthyosaurs, both for
taxa and characters

reappraise the definitions of the major ichthyosaur clades

provide a comparison of the different methodologies and results for
estimating phylogeny.

### Acknowledgements {#sys:Acknowledgements}

I would like to thank Mike Benton and Emily Rayfield for their
supervision and comments; David Button, Phil Donoghue, Joseph Keating,
Jessica Lawrence, Erin Maxwell, Luke Parry, Mark Puttick, Aubrey
Roberts, Tom Stubbs, and the Radsphere for discussion; the Willi Hennig
Society for their support of TNT; and my parents for their support in my
PhD.

Previous work {#sys:Previouswork}
-------------

Joseph and Mary Anning found the first recognised ichthyosaur materials
in 1810--1811 in the Lias Group at Lyme Regis, Dorset [@Torrens1995],
although referable material may have been figured in earlier catalogues
[@Lhwyd1699; @Baier1708]. A largely complete specimen, identified as a
"fossil crocodile" was found and reported in @Hawker1807. This, and
other material, was originally described by @Home1814
[@Home1816; @Home1818; @Home1819; @Home1819a; @Home1820] in a series of
papers, but the name *Ichthyosaurus* was not applied until 1818
[@Konig1818]; @Home1819 [@Home1819a] later suggested the name
*Proteosaurus*. The first species were described and named by
@Conybeare1822, which included *Ichthyosaurus communis*, *Ichthyosaurus
platyodon*, *Ichthyosaurus tenuirostris*, and *Ichthyosaurus
intermedius*, all of which were based on characteristics of the teeth;
this has since proved problematic in defining and diagnosing these taxa
more rigorously. @Hawkins1834 [@Hawkins1840] revised the taxonomy of
*Ichthyosaurus*, finding four species, based upon the limb configuration
rather than the teeth. @Cuvier1836 described the osteology of
ichthyosaurs more fully, but refrained from lower-level classification.
These early works allied ichthyosaurs to human vertebrae
[@Scheuchzer1708], fishes [@Home1814], amphibians (specifically
*Proteus*; [@Home1819; @Home1819a]), or crocodiles [@DelaBeche1821], but
the structure of the pectoral girdle also drew comparisons to the
duck-billed platypus, *Ornithorhynchus* [@Home1818].

The discovery of *Plesiosaurus*, and the similarity of the vertebrae and
limb adaptations between this and *Ichthyosaurus*, led to their grouping
in the Enaliosauria [@Conybeare1822]. @deBlainville1835 was the first to
place ichthyosaurs in a formal taxon, the Class Ichthyosauria,
alongside -- but not part of -- classes Reptilia, and Pterosauria,
whereas Order Plesiosauria was included in Reptilia. This was not
changed until @Owen1859 referred the genus *Ichthyosaurus* instead to
the Order Ichthyopterygia, within Reptilia, although this has often
erroneously been cited as @Owen1840.

Numerous ichthyosaur finds were reported throughout the nineteenth
century, initially from the Lower Jurassic of the United Kingdom
[@Young1821], but soon followed by remains from south-west Germany
[@Jaeger1824; @Jaeger1828; @Theodori1843; @Bronn1844]. Materials from
the Upper Jurassic Kimmeridge Clay Formation were mentioned by
@DelaBeche1821, but first described by @Owen1840. Ichthyosaur remains
from the lithographic limestones near Solnhofen, Germany, were described
by @Wagner1852 [@Wagner1853; @Meyer1864]. Cretaceous material, from the
Chalk of England, was reported by @Carter1846 and @Owen1851. Possible
Triassic remains were described by @Meyer1848 [@Meyer1849] as *Tholodus
schmidi*, but the first definitely Triassic ichthyosaur was assigned to
*Ichthyosaurus atavus* by @Quenstedt1852. Later, ichthyosaur remains
were reported from the Triassic of Italy [@Bassani1886], Svalbard
[@Hulke1873], and the USA [@Leidy1868]; the Jurassic of Argentina
[@Dames1893], France [@Valenciennes1861; @Sauvage1894], and the USA
[@Marsh1879]; and the Cretaceous of Argentina [@Huene1925a], Australia
[@MCoy1867; @Etheridge1888], France [@Sauvage1882], Indonesia
[@Martin1888], and Russia [@Kiprijanoff1881; @Owen1881].

### Early classifications {#sys:Earlyclassifications}

Up to 1868, all ichthyosaur species were referred to the single genus
*Ichthyosaurus*. @Leidy1868 erected the second genus, *Cymbospondylus*,
for vertebral materials from the Triassic of Nevada, USA. This was
followed by *Cetarthrosaurus* from the Cretaceous of the UK
[@Seeley1873] -- for a long time not considered ichthyosaurian
[@Fischer2014a] -- and *Ophthalmosaurus* soon after [@Seeley1874].

The first consideration of the internal classification of ichthyosaurs
was by @Kiprijanoff1881 [88], who separated them into two groups:
Ichthyosauri Longipinnipedes and Ichthyosauri Latipinnipedes, each split
into two subgroups based on tooth morphology. This dichotomy was
principally based upon the size and shape of the forelimb:
longipinnipeds have longer, narrower fore- and hindlimbs, similar in
size to each other; more elongate jaws; small anterior limb bones with
notches; pelvic girdle developed similarly to pectoral girdle; long and
narrow tail fin. Latipinnipeds were characterised by shorter snout; eyes
relatively smaller than longipinnipeds; short and wide fore- and
hindlimbs, with the hindlimbs much shorter than forelimbs; anterior limb
bones without notches; more phalanges than longipinnipeds; larger
pectoral girdle than pelvic; shorter, but broader tail fin than
longipinnipeds.

@Baur1887 [@Baur1887a] proposed the separation of Ichthyopterygia into
three families for the three well-known genera: Mixosauridae for
*Mixosaurus*, Ichthyosauridae for *Ichthyosaurus*, and Ophthalmosauridae
(Baptanodontidae) for *Ophthalmosaurus/Baptanodon*, mostly based on the
shape of the radius and ulna, and their articulations with each other
and the humerus. These two schemes were combined by @Lydekker1888, who
primarily separated Ichthyopterygia into these genus-families, then
divided *Ichthyosaurus* into latipinnate and longipinnate groups and the
tooth-based subgroups -- campylodont and 'typical' in the latipinnate
group; acutirostrine, tenuirostrine, and platyodont in the longipinnate
group -- adding specific characters of the coracoid and humerus. This
system was followed by @Fraas1891 and @Bauer1898 [@Bauer1900]. With the
description of *Shastasaurus*, @Merriam1902 added the Family
Shastasauridae to the scheme of @Baur1887 [@Baur1887a]. In light of the
numerous new Triassic forms, @Merriam1905 discussed the evolution of the
ichthyosaurs, suggesting that Mixosauridae might have given rise to the
latipinnate Jurassic forms, while Shastasauridae led on to the
longipinnate forms. On discovering *Grippia longirostris*, @Wiman1929
originally placed it in a separate Order Grippidia, but later suggested
that it be listed alongside Ichthyosauria, both as suborders within
Ichthyopterygia [@Wiman1933].

@Merriam1908 [88] presented the first phylogenetic tree of
Ichthyosauria, which had a dichotomy between the Triassic and Jurassic
ichthyosaur taxa, based on the number of rib articulations. In this
scheme, *Mixosaurus* is uncertainly placed due to the uncertain taxonomy
of *Mixosaurus atavus*, but the latipinnate-longipinnate division is
retained and treated as homoplasious, evolving separately in both
Triassic and Jurassic ichthyosaurs. @Huene1922b [102] also presented a
phylogenetic tree that extended the latipinnate-longipinnate dichotomy
from the base of Ichthyosauria through to the Cretaceous taxa --
*Omphalosaurus* was positioned as the most basal member on a separate
branch, but is considered here as outside Ichthyosauromorpha.
*Mixosaurus* was considered latipinnate, alongside *Eurypterygius*
(= *Ichthyosaurus*), *Ophthalmosaurus, Brachypterygius, Macropterygius*,
and *Myopterygius*, while *Shastasaurus*-like ichthyosaurs,
*Leptopterygius, Stenopterygius, Nannopterygius*, and *Platypterygius*
were longipinnate. *Cymbospondylus* was uncertainly allied with
*Shastasaurus*; this was later expanded upon [@Huene1923a; @Huene1923].
@Appleby1961 reiterated this, with new features of the skull,
particularly articulations of the temporal and nasal regions, and new
correlations were drawn by @McGowan1969 [@McGowan1972] for both Lower
Jurassic and Cretaceous ichthyosaurs. The distinctions between these two
major ichthyosaur groups -- latipinnate and longipinnate -- were set out
by @McGowan1972a from extensive comparisons of taxa from all three
periods of the Mesozoic. Nine limb characters and three cranial ratios
were defined that differentiated between the two groups, but both groups
exhibited similar trends through their evolution; those occurring in
longipinnate ichthyosaurs were described later [@McGowan1972b].

The first hint that this dichotomy of ichthyosaurs was not the full
story is found in @McGowan1976. Using phenetic methods -- particularly
skull ratios, but also binary characters -- cluster analysis, and
principal coordinates analysis, several groupings arose, containing both
traditionally latipinnate and longipinnate taxa -- e.g. *Ichthyosaurus
communis* alongside *Stenopterygius quadriscissus*. McGowan did not then
completely revise ichthyosaur systematics due to the small number of
taxa included. @Appleby1979 used McGowan's [-@McGowan1972a] characters
to show that many Lower Jurassic ichthyosaur specimens do not show a
clear affinity to latipinnates or longipinnates, that the difference
between these two is uncertain, and that mixosaurids did not provide an
antecedent to later latipinnate ichthyosaurs as had been suggested
previously [@Merriam1908; @Huene1922b]. In support of the latter point,
he cited the more primitive configuration of the forelimb and lack of a
tail bend in *Mixosaurus*, among other reasons. However, Appleby did not
rule out the separation of latipinnates and longipinnates, suggesting
that latipinnates were derived from longipinnates in the Late
Triassic--Early Jurassic. @Johnson1979 found several specimens of the
longipinnate *Stenopterygius* that possess latipinnate characters, again
weakening this division.

### Cladistic analyses {#sys:Cladisticanalyses}

The first cladogram of Ichthyopterygia was included in Mazin's
[-@Mazin1981] revision of *Grippia longirostris*, featuring five
characters that defined outgroups to Ichthyosauria: *Grippia* was found
to be the most basal ichthyopterygian, with Mixosauria, and
*Utatsusaurus* as successive ingroups. This was expanded to 'all'
ichthyosaurs the following year in a cladistic analysis with 54 taxa and
14 characters
([\[fig:prevphy-Mazin1982\]](#fig:prevphy-Mazin1982){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:prevphy-Mazin1982"}; [@Mazin1982]). Mazin's characters
are similar to those used in many later analyses, although several of
his characters have later been compressed into one -- e.g. characters 8,
9, 11, and 13: tridactyly, didactyly, and position of the limb axis
[@Motani1999]. Two characters were also repeated as homoplasious --
characters 3 and 7: reduction of metapodium, and characters 8 and 14:
tridactyly. The resulting cladogram did not show a
latipinnate-longipinnate split, but instead a series of nested
subclades, from which several families -- largely similar to those
previously conceived -- split. The small number of characters in this
study meant that several genera were resolved together in polytomies --
e.g. *Temnodontosaurus, Grendelius, Leptopterygius* (= *Leptonectes*),
and *Platypterygius*. Mazin also did not include an outgroup, merely
citing "ichthyopterygian characters" at the base of the tree [@Mazin1982
fig. 7].

![Previous hypotheses of whole-group ichthyosaur phylogeny. **a,** a
simplified version of @Mazin1982: 51 taxa (excluding *Omphalosaurus*),
14 characters. **b,** @Motani1999c: 27 ingroup taxa, 105 characters,
parsimony analysis. **c,** @Sander2000: 16 ingroup taxa, 120 characters,
parsimony analysis. **d,** @Maisch2000c: 32 ingroup taxa, 128
characters, parsimony analysis. **e,** @Frobisch2013: 32 ingroup taxa,
112 characters based upon Sander *et al*.'s [@Sander2011] modification
of @Motani1999c, Bayesian-inference likelihood analysis.
[\[fig:previous-phylogenies\]]{#fig:previous-phylogenies
label="fig:previous-phylogenies"}](./img/fig-previous-phylogenies.pdf "fig:"){#fig:previous-phylogenies
width="\\textwidth"} [\[fig:prevphy-Mazin1982\]]{#fig:prevphy-Mazin1982
label="fig:prevphy-Mazin1982"}
[\[fig:prevphy-Motani1999\]]{#fig:prevphy-Motani1999
label="fig:prevphy-Motani1999"}
[\[fig:prevphy-Sander2000\]]{#fig:prevphy-Sander2000
label="fig:prevphy-Sander2000"}
[\[fig:prevphy-Maisch2000\]]{#fig:prevphy-Maisch2000
label="fig:prevphy-Maisch2000"}
[\[fig:prevphy-Frobisch2013\]]{#fig:prevphy-Frobisch2013
label="fig:prevphy-Frobisch2013"}

@Callaway1989a determined the relationships of shastasaurid
ichthyosaurs, and used *Grippia* and *Petrolacosaurus* as outgroups,
based upon analysis of the diapsid affinities of ichthyosaurs
[@Mazin1981; @Callaway1989a; @Massare1990]. This was the first use of
computational parsimony analysis for ichthyosaur phylogeny, using PAUP
version 2.4.1 [@Swofford1985] with nine taxa and 33 characters. Most
characters are multistate, with many being discretised continuous
ratios, but these characters have survived in many subsequent analyses
and serve to diagnose not only Shastasauridae, but other ichthyosaur
clades too. This analysis was extended by @DalSasso1996 with the
addition of *Besanosaurus leptorhynchus*. @Godefroit1993 separated
*Ichthyosaurus*, *Stenopterygius*, and *Ophthalmosaurus*, including
several synapomorphies for some clades, although the results conflicted
with @Mazin1982. @Maisch1997c presented further characters -- largely
binary -- and a new phylogeny to test the position of *Mikadocephalus
gracilirostris*, afterwards producing a separate matrix for
post-Triassic ichthyosaurs [@Maisch1998]. @Motani1998 included a small
phylogeny of the most basal ichthyosaurs, and @Nicholls1999 presented
one for mixosaurids.

The years 1999 and 2000 were marked by a major advance in understanding
of ichthyosaur phylogeny: three large, independent analyses were
published that included many ichthyosaur taxa and over 100 characters
each [@Motani1999c; @Maisch2000c; @Sander2000]. All of these phylogenies
used PAUP\* version 4.0β (various betas; [@Swofford1998]), yielded
similar topologies, and agreed with previous cladistic analyses in
having a series of nested clades marked by stepwise addition of
characters
([\[fig:prevphy-Motani1999,fig:prevphy-Sander2000,fig:prevphy-Maisch2000\]](#fig:prevphy-Motani1999,fig:prevphy-Sander2000,fig:prevphy-Maisch2000){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:prevphy-Motani1999,fig:prevphy-Sander2000,fig:prevphy-Maisch2000"}).
However, several previously monophyletic taxa -- e.g. Shastasauridae and
Grippidia -- were found as paraphyletic, leading to the concept of
ichthyosaur grades [@Motani2005]. Despite the different conceptions of
these analyses, many of the characters were similar, but often used
different coding styles: @Maisch2000c favoured more strictly binary
characters; as did @Motani1999c, who also included discretised ratios
like @Callaway1989a, but treating them tentatively. @Sander2000 included
several multistate characters to capture presence/absence and variation
['composite coding' of @Strong1999]. In all analyses, the historical
taxa of Mixosauridae (= Mixosauria), and post-Triassic ichthyosaurs
(Neoichthyosauria) were recovered. @Motani1999c and @Sander2000 also
included extensive outgroups -- @Maisch2000c used only an all zero
outgroup -- marking the first indication of ichthyosaurs' hupehsuchian
affinities in a phylogeny, while confirming previous ideas on diapsid
affinities. Criticism of all the above analyses was made in
@McGowan2003. The clade definitions applied by @Motani1999c partially
follow @Mazin1982, notably including Ichthyosauria within
Ichthyopterygia [@Wiman1933; @Mazin1981 after], thereby reinforcing this
distinction between the ichthyosaurian and non-ichthyosaurian
ichthyopterygians.

### Recent work {#sys:Recentwork}

Most cladistic studies following these three have tended to be
extensions of @Motani1999c, including new taxa, or less frequently,
character modifications. @Maisch2001b
[@Maisch2003; @Maisch2003c; @Maisch2006c], however, favoured the
@Maisch2000c analysis as their basis. Consequently, topologies of
ichthyosaur phylogeny have varied little since 2000.

![Examples of previous hypotheses of ichthyosaur subclade relations.
**a**, Nicholls and Manabe's [@Nicholls2001] Shastasauria phylogeny: 14
taxa, 44 characters. **b**, Jiang *et al.*'s [@Jiang2006] Mixosauridae
phylogeny: 9 taxa, 23 characters. **c**, Fischer *et al.*'s
[@Fischer2013a] Parvipelvia phylogeny: 26 taxa, 66 characters, **d**,
Fernández's [@Fernandez2007] Thunnosauria phylogeny: 9 taxa, 24
characters. **e**, Druckenmiller and Maxwell's [@Druckenmiller2010]
Thunnosauria phylogeny: 16 taxa, 49 characters. All used parsimony
analysis in PAUP\* or TNT.
[\[fig:previous-subclade-phylogenies\]]{#fig:previous-subclade-phylogenies
label="fig:previous-subclade-phylogenies"}](./img/fig-previous-subclade-phylogenies.pdf "fig:"){#fig:previous-subclade-phylogenies
width="\\textwidth"}
[\[fig:prevsbclphy-Nicholls2001-Shastasauria\]]{#fig:prevsbclphy-Nicholls2001-Shastasauria
label="fig:prevsbclphy-Nicholls2001-Shastasauria"}
[\[fig:prevsbclphy-Jiang2006-Mixosauridae\]]{#fig:prevsbclphy-Jiang2006-Mixosauridae
label="fig:prevsbclphy-Jiang2006-Mixosauridae"}
[\[fig:prevsbclphy-Fischer2013-Parvipelvia\]]{#fig:prevsbclphy-Fischer2013-Parvipelvia
label="fig:prevsbclphy-Fischer2013-Parvipelvia"}
[\[fig:prevsbclphy-Fernandez2007-Thunnosauria\]]{#fig:prevsbclphy-Fernandez2007-Thunnosauria
label="fig:prevsbclphy-Fernandez2007-Thunnosauria"}
[\[fig:prevsbclphy-Druckenmiloler2010-Thunnosauria\]]{#fig:prevsbclphy-Druckenmiloler2010-Thunnosauria
label="fig:prevsbclphy-Druckenmiloler2010-Thunnosauria"}

Other post-2000 analyses included several new taxa, and introduced new
characters. Firstly, these included Shastasauridae
([\[fig:prevsbclphy-Nicholls2001-Shastasauria\]](#fig:prevsbclphy-Nicholls2001-Shastasauria){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:prevsbclphy-Nicholls2001-Shastasauria"};
[@Nicholls2001; @Frobisch2006]), and Mixosauridae
([\[fig:prevsbclphy-Jiang2006-Mixosauridae\]](#fig:prevsbclphy-Jiang2006-Mixosauridae){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:prevsbclphy-Jiang2006-Mixosauridae"};
[@Jiang2005a; @Maisch2005; @Jiang2006; @Chen2010]). All of these
analyses found their clades to be monophyletic, but that several genera
were not, and thus were in need of taxonomic revision. A modification to
the @Motani1999c matrix was made by @Sander2011, by including
'shastasaurid grade' relevant characters, which have subsequently been
used in other total-group analyses [@Frobisch2013; @Ji2013]. The
analysis by @Frobisch2013 was the first not to use parsimony, but rather
Bayesian inference with MrBayes version 3.2.1 [@Ronquist2012]. Their
resultant topology was similar to previous hypotheses, but
*Utatsusaurus* was not recovered as the most basal taxon
([\[fig:prevphy-Frobisch2013\]](#fig:prevphy-Frobisch2013){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:prevphy-Frobisch2013"}). Instead, this analysis, as did
that of @Ji2013, found *Parvinatator* to be the most basal
ichthyopterygian. These relationships too proved unstable, and prone to
change or collapse with the addition of new taxa
[@Chen2013; @Cuthbertson2013; @Cuthbertson2013a].

Later, the relationships within Thunnosauria and Parvipelvia became
increasingly variable, with new specimens and taxa being found and input
into cladistic analyses; this has been the focus in recent years.
@Fernandez2007 introduced a new Thunnosauria-Ophthalmosauridae-focused
character set
([\[fig:prevsbclphy-Fernandez2007-Thunnosauria\]](#fig:prevsbclphy-Fernandez2007-Thunnosauria){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:prevsbclphy-Fernandez2007-Thunnosauria"}), which was
extended by @Maxwell2010 [@Druckenmiller2010]. These found
Ophthalmosauridae to comprise a series of nested clades, but that many
relationships were unresolved or poorly supported. Additional Jurassic
and Cretaceous taxa have extended these analyses to the whole of
Thunnosauria and Parvipelvia
[@Caine2011; @Fischer2011c; @Fischer2012; @Maxwell2012b; @Fischer2013a].
@Fischer2011c was the first to use TNT for parsimony analysis
[@Goloboff2008]. Some analyses suggest an internal split within
Ophthalmosauridae into Ophthalmosaurinae and Platypterygiinae
([\[fig:prevsbclphy-Fischer2013-Parvipelvia\]](#fig:prevsbclphy-Fischer2013-Parvipelvia){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:prevsbclphy-Fischer2013-Parvipelvia"};
[@Fischer2012; @Fischer2013a]), whereas @Druckenmiller2010 recover
ophthalmosaurine taxa paraphyletic to Platypterygiinae
([\[fig:prevsbclphy-Druckenmiloler2010-Thunnosauria\]](#fig:prevsbclphy-Druckenmiloler2010-Thunnosauria){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:prevsbclphy-Druckenmiloler2010-Thunnosauria"}). Several
genera are found not to be monophyletic within Parvipelvia, suggesting
taxonomic revision is necessary. Additionally, these resultant trees
vary between themselves, despite similar character sets, and are often
poorly resolved and supported, except for major clades, further
indicating taxonomic instability.

The recent discovery and description of Chinese Early and Middle
Triassic fossils has added several taxa towards the base of
Ichthyopterygia/Ichthyosauriformes, increased our knowledge of other
poorly known taxa, and helped resolve the relations of ichthyosaurs to
other reptile groups [@Benton2013]. New specimens of hupehsuchians, and
a general diapsid phylogenetic analysis, has lent support to an
Ichthyopterygia-Hupehsuchia sister relationship [@Chen2014a]. A new
basal taxon, *Cartorhynchus lenticarpus*, led @Motani2014a to suggest
names for new basal clades: Ichthyosauromorpha as the node that includes
*Hupehsuchus nanchangensis* and *Ichthyosaurus communis*, and from this,
Ichthyosauriformes as the stem that is more closely related to
*Ichthyosaurus communis*. They presented a new, largely genus-level,
phylogeny -- based on parsimony analysis -- that placed *Cartorhynchus
lenticarpus* as the most basal ichthyosauriform, and *Chaohusaurus* as
the most basal ichthyopterygian. This does not agree with the original
definitions of @Motani1999c [see
[2.5](#sys:SystematicPalaeontology){reference-type="ref"
reference="sys:SystematicPalaeontology"}].

In summary, the most recent work on ichthyosaur phylogeny has resolved
the group as a single clade, with a sister relationship to Hupehsuchia.
The internal topology has mostly been constructed using parsimony
methods as series of nested ingroups, but several large clades --
particularly Mixosauridae, Parvipelvia, and Neoichthyosauria -- are
commonly recovered and well supported. Individual taxa are, however,
prone to change position depending on taxon and character sampling.
These inconsistencies and lack of investigation of alternative
methodologies are the impetus behind the present study.

Materials & methods {#sys:Materialsmethods}
-------------------

The compilation of the matrix and subsequent analysis here follow
previous studies in methodology, but with substantial extensions to
improve understanding of the tree. Specifically, a modified 'supermatrix
methodology' is used to compile the data, then both maximum parsimony
and maximum likelihood methods for analysis.

### Taxon selection {#sys:Taxonselection}

Almost all valid taxa ichthyosaur species were included: 107 operational
taxonomic units plus an outgroup taxon
([5.1](#appB:Taxonlist){reference-type="ref"
reference="appB:Taxonlist"}). *Cetarthrosaurus walkeri* was excluded as
the only known material, a propodial from the Cretaceous of the UK,
cannot be assigned to fore- or hindlimb so cannot be reliably coded
[@Fischer2014a]. While most of these have good coverage in the
literature, for some taxa -- e.g. *Mixosaurus kuhnschnyderi* -- specific
details were not present in the publications. Following @Motani2000a, no
species of *Omphalosaurus* were included, although this has subsequently
been discussed by @Sander2003; *Tholodus schmidi* was included, despite
its incompleteness, due to its uncertain affinities. As the type species
of *Cymbospondylus*, *Cymbospondylus piscosus* was included, again
despite its incompleteness; a formal revision of the genus is in
preparation, and has been for some years [@McGowan2003 66]. For the
ingroup, taxa considered valid as of July 2015, both in previous studies
and from literature review, were included
([5.1](#appB:Taxonlist){reference-type="ref"
reference="appB:Taxonlist"}); the most recently named taxon that is
included is *Ichthyosaurus anningae* [Lomax & Massare, -@Lomax2015].
Taxa that could be removed safely *a priori* were identified using the
Concatabominations method of @Siu-Ting2015, an extension of Wilkinson's
[-@Wilkinson1995] Safe Taxon Removal ( STR).

*Hupehsuchus nanchangensis* was selected as the outgroup, based upon
previous analyses, which have consistently found this taxon to be the
immediate outgroup to Ichthyopterygia/Ichthyosauriformes
[@Motani1999c; @Chen2014a]. This taxon represents the best known
hupehsuchian: *Nanchangosaurus* and *Parahupehsuchus* are known only
from specimens where phylogenetically important parts of the body are
missing or less well known, particularly the skull
[@Chen2014; @Chen2014a]. Most of the methods used allow only a single
outgroup to be explicitly selected, otherwise relying on the
similarities of these outgroup taxa to maintain their close
relationships. This is not certain to unite these taxa, given the
incompleteness of the specimens, but topology constraints may be used to
circumvent this.

### Character list {#sys:Characterlist}

The character list was collated by critically comparing the characters
used in previous analyses
([5.2](#appB:Characterlist){reference-type="ref"
reference="appB:Characterlist"}). First, the characters of @Motani1999c
were compared with @Maisch2000c, which, having been published about 18
months afterwards, incorporated many similar characters. @Maisch2000c
[8] noted this similarity despite the separate genesis of the two
analyses. Characters were selected based upon their informativeness in
the analyses from which they were derived, and their relevance to
ichthyosauriform ingroup relationships: characters relating specifically
to a diapsid outgroup were excluded. Next, additional characters from
@Sander2000 were added. These three large analyses incorporated most
relevant characters from previous phylogenetic studies on ichthyosaurs,
so it was necessary to review previously suggested characters only
briefly. Characters from subsequent analyses were incorporated, up to
the most recent available
[@Arkhangelsky2014; @Roberts2014; @Motani2014a]. In some cases,
characters had been modified for certain subclades. In these cases, the
characters were either reverted to the original form, or compared to the
other clades and additional states or modifications added as necessary.

In evaluating each character, I considered the following

similarity to other characters -- whether two differently worded
characters were the same

uniqueness of character states -- preventing the same character state
from being recorded more than once

informativeness of the character -- whether it is shared and so may
define a clade.

While most characters were incorporated unchanged, some were modified to
meet these criteria (individual characters are discussed in
[5.2](#appB:Characterlist){reference-type="ref"
reference="appB:Characterlist"}). In particular, characters were
modified in accordance to their uniqueness of states using reductive
coding, following the suggestions of @Strong1999 [@Brazeau2011].
Spurious groupings created by the algorithms used in maximum parsimony
were circumvented by collapsing zero-length branches, the default in TNT
[@Brazeau2011]. Further characters received minor modifications in
polarity, as state `0` was preferred for the non-ichthyosauriform
outgroup. Besides designating the outgroup, most characters were treated
as unordered in the analyses.

### Matrix completion {#sys:Matrixcompletion}

As many new species and characters were being incorporated into the data
matrix, this was largely completed anew, with reference to previous
datasets. Where characters had not been previously coded for taxa, these
were added from personal observation and the literature
([\[tbl:taxonCodingSources,appB:Taxoncodes\]](#tbl:taxonCodingSources,appB:Taxoncodes){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:taxonCodingSources,appB:Taxoncodes"}). As this is the
first complete species-level phylogeny of Ichthyosauriformes, many taxa
have been coded, or at least separated, for the first time. Taxa in need
of revision were preferentially coded from the type material, but for
all taxa this was not exclusively the case. Data for coding was
collected primarily from the literature, supplemented by personal
observation of certain material
([\[tbl:taxonCodingSources\]](#tbl:taxonCodingSources){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:taxonCodingSources"}). Coding from previous literature
was completed based on descriptions of material and images contained
therein. Where features were unclear or uncertain from these -- either
due to brevity of the description, or lack of appropriate image --
unambiguous codings were taken from the most recent phylogenetic matrix
available. If the coding was ambiguous -- i.e. coded at genus level,
and/or polymorphic -- this was coded as uncertainty.

The difference between non-coding from incompleteness, or from
inapplicability as a result of the reductive coding methods, must also
be made clear. In this study, I have followed convention by using '`?`'
for states that are unknown due to incompleteness of the material --
i.e. the true value may be any applicable state for the character, or
none. Inapplicability is recorded as '`-`' -- i.e. the character is
non-codable due to exclusion by another character. Currently, there is
no phylogenetic algorithm that successfully differentiates between these
two forms of non-coding. They are therefore often treated equally as
unknown states -- i.e. as '`?`'. As the algorithms used may,
temporarily, assign states to the formation of clades based upon their
tree-finding criteria -- parsimony or likelihood -- this can lead to
spurious groupings, but can be circumvented by collapsing zero-length
branches [@Brazeau2011].

### Phylogenetic analyses {#sys:Analysismethods}

Three analytical approaches were used: maximum parsimony, maximum
likelihood, and Bayesian-inference likelihood. In each case, a
'standard' run was completed in each case, followed by several more
advanced techniques that aimed to improve resolution, accuracy, and test
further hypotheses. For each analysis, the commands used are included in
[5.4](#appB:Phylocode){reference-type="ref" reference="appB:Phylocode"}.

#### Optimisation criteria {#sys:optimisation-criteria}

Two criteria were used for optimisation of characters in the analysis:
parsimony and likelihood. *Parsimony* is conceptually the simpler
criterion: the tree is constructed by finding the shortest overall
length (= character changes or 'steps'; maximising parsimony) when all
taxa have been added. This implies that evolution of character states --
specifically character state changes -- should occur a minimum number of
times across the whole tree. While a powerful assumption in scientific
reasoning, that the minimum number of character changes occurs along an
individual branch in a phylogeny is a simplification. This can be
exacerbated when analysing across extensive time ranges, and with many
differently-formulated characters that may evolve at different rates.
*Likelihood* optimisation, however, relies on a model of evolution with
specific probabilities for character state changes, in which the
likelihood for the entire tree is maximised; this is incorporated in the
Mk model [@Lewis2001]. The application of likelihood allows rate
variability to be explicitly incorporated as an extension of the Mk
model. For morphological data, the can include rate heterogeneity
between characters and non-symmetrical costs of state changes within
characters. This extensibility of the Mk model allows for a more
'realistic' hypothesis of evolution to be applied to the tree search.
Limitations of the Mk model are that characters and lineages are treated
as independent. Additionally, the complexity of evolutionary models for
morphological data -- which often consist of a series of mutations in
the genome -- makes a direct likelihood model difficult to achieve. Such
preconceptions about the data are integral to using *Bayesian inference*
in tree searches: a distribution of the anticipated rate variability may
be incorporated as a prior to the analysis. The posterior tree sample
then represents the optimisation of the data under likelihood using the
Mk model with the extended parameters. This is not necessarily the
maximum likelihood for the dataset, as this may not be included in the
prior distributions, so may not be explored during the search algorithm.
Under both parsimony and likelihood, homoplasy -- repeated changing
between character states; the repeated evolution of homologous
features -- may be explicitly penalised using a non-symmetrical state
change distribution (under likelihood); or ordering of characters (under
parsimony). While the use of priors allows for a more complicated,
potentially more applicable, model than under maximum likelihood,
testing of priors for morphological data has so far been limited,
despite these having an impact on tree estimation (see
[2.4.3](#sys:ResultsBayesian){reference-type="ref"
reference="sys:ResultsBayesian"}; [e.g. @Wright2016]). An additional
method is the use of *implied weighting* methods under parsimony:
following the initial state change in each character, subsequent state
changes are down-weighted so that they have less impact on optimisation
of the tree topology.

In palaeontological studies, parsimony has been by far the most widely
used optimisation criterion for phylogeny reconstruction [e.g. within
marine reptiles alone Mosasauroidea:
@Konishi2011; @Palci2013; Sauropterygia:
@Druckenmiller2008a; @Ketchum2010; @Rieppel1999; @Neenan2014; and
Ichthyosauriformes: @Motani1999c; @Maisch2000c; @Sander2000]. More
recent macroevolutionary studies have used maximum likelihood to
estimate rates of evolution in clades [e.g. @Brusatte2014], and
phylogenetic analyses on morphological data -- both with and without
molecular -- using likelihood is becoming more common [e.g.
@Lee2007; @Lee2012; @Frobisch2013; @Fischer2016]. With these new
techniques and criteria come the problems of conflicting results --
i.e. conflicting tree topologies. Initial studies comparing the results
of parsimony versus Bayesian analysis have shown that tree searching
under the Bayesian criterion will give more accurate results at the
expense of precision [@Wright2014; @OReilly2016]. In palaeontological
studies -- where the original phylogenetic tree is unknown, data is
incomplete, and homologies may be uncertain -- the combination of all
available techniques provides the best attempt at finding the 'true'
tree.

#### Parsimony analysis {#sys:MethodsParsimony}

Parsimony analysis used TNT version 1.5 [@Goloboff2008; @Goloboff2016].
The commands were modified from those in the accompanying
'`aquickie.run`' script, in order to allow for a more exhaustive tree
search and for support testing (see
[\[appB:Phylocode-1TNT,lst:scripttntrun\]](#appB:Phylocode-1TNT,lst:scripttntrun){reference-type="ref"
reference="appB:Phylocode-1TNT,lst:scripttntrun"}), based upon the
advanced searching algorithms of @Nixon1999 [@Goloboff1999]. Characters
were treated as unweighted and unordered except where they had
previously been used as such. The tree search used a multiple
replications search (`xmult`) with exclusive sector search
(`sectsch : xss`), four rounds of tree fusing (`sectsch : fuse 4`), 10
rounds of drifting (`xmult : drift 10`), and 200 iterations of
ratcheting (`xmult : ratchet 200`). Drifting was limited to trees within
an absolute fit difference of 2, and relative fit difference of 0.1
(`drift : fitdiff 2 rfitdiff 0.1`). The shortest tree was hit 100 times
(`xmult : hit 100`). These settings allow for rapid analysis, while
still covering a large number of tree topologies, minimising entrapment
within local minima, and all within a reasonable timeframe. An *a
posteriori* analysis of 'wildcard taxa' used the iterative position
congruence (reduced) ( PCR) method of @Pol2009. This, and the TNT script
provided, identifies taxa that cause the collapse of clades into
polytomies. It also lists the characters that cause this instability,
and suggests additional data that may resolve the relationships. The
results are similar to the command `prunnelsen`, but the script works
much faster, using its iterative process. Additionally, this method is
incorporated into TNT as the command `pcrprun`, but this does not
include the character-listing portion of the script above. The script
was intended to be used, but this was not robust to the number of
unstable taxa attempted to be pruned (fewer than four taxa left), so the
TNT command was employed instead. Bremer (single decay) support values
were calculated based upon tree bisection and reconnection (TBR)
relative to the most parsimonious trees. Symmetrical resampling
frequencies ([@Goloboff2003]; `resample sym`) were calculated in TNT
using 10 000 replicates (`resample rep 10000`), holding one tree each
time (`resample [mu1=ho1;]`), with change probability 33%
(`resample prob 33`).

#### Maximum likelihood analysis {#sys:MethodsRAxML}

Maximum likelihood analysis was carried out using RAxML AVX
version 8.2.7 ([@Stamatakis2014]; see
[\[appB:Phylocode-2RAxML,lst:raxmlcode\]](#appB:Phylocode-2RAxML,lst:raxmlcode){reference-type="ref"
reference="appB:Phylocode-2RAxML,lst:raxmlcode"}). This used the
multistate gamma-distribution mode of rate substitution
(`-m MULTIGAMMA`) within the Mk model ([@Lewis2001]; `-K MK`). The
random number seed was generated using the system clock in the format
`YYYYMMDDhhmmss` (year, month, day, hour, minute, second) and retained
for all analyses: `20141002124734`. RAxML is unable to accept
polymorphic data, so these were replaced with uncertainties. The
analysis was run 10 000 times (`-N 10000`), producing a best tree with
node bootstrap values (`-f a`), then log likelihood tests (SH-tests;
[@Shimodaira1999]; `-f h`) were computed between this and the other
trees produced.

#### Bayesian-inference likelihood analysis {#sys:MethodsBayesian}

The Bayesian-flavoured maximum likelihood analysis used the Mk model
with both equal and gamma distribution priors for site rate variation
(`lset rates=equal` or `lset rates=gamma`) as implemented in MrBayes
version 3.2 ([@Lewis2001; @Ronquist2012]; see
[\[appB:Phylocode-3MrBayes,lst:mrbayesequalprior,lst:mrbayesgammaprior,lst:mrbayesequal,lst:mrbayesgamma\]](#appB:Phylocode-3MrBayes,lst:mrbayesequalprior,lst:mrbayesgammaprior,lst:mrbayesequal,lst:mrbayesgamma){reference-type="ref"
reference="appB:Phylocode-3MrBayes,lst:mrbayesequalprior,lst:mrbayesgammaprior,lst:mrbayesequal,lst:mrbayesgamma"}).
State frequencies are defined using a symmetrical Direchlet prior fixed
at infinity (`prset symdirihyperpr=fixed(infinity)`); this setting makes
all state transitions equally likely -- e.g. `0→1` and `1→0`. Site
substitution is allowed to occur at different rates, but is
time-reversible (`lset nst=6`). The analyses were run for 10^8^
generations (`mcmcp ngen=100000000`) with four runs (`mcmcp nruns=4`) of
four chains (`mcmcp nchains=4`) that were sampled every 1000 generations
(`mcmcp samplefreq=1000`), discarding the first 25% of trees produced
(`mcmcp burninfrac=0.25`). Rather than letting this complete needlessly,
a stop value was included, so that the run was ended if and when the
standard deviation of partition frequencies ≤0.007
(`mcmcp stoprule=yes stopval=0.007`). This was chosen as a value
somewhat less than the typical convergence level of 0.01 for recovery of
most supported clades. Clade support values were measured based upon the
credibility interval calculated by MrBayes. The marginal likelihood was
calculated to test between the efficacy of the equal- or gamma-rates
site substitution models. A stepping-stone analysis was done in MrBayes
using 30 steps, sampling every 1000 generations for 3.1 × 10^7^
generations, with α = 0.4 [@Xie2011; @Fan2011].

#### Implied weighting parsimony analysis {#sys:MethodsPIWE}

To investigate the effects of homoplasy, the implied weighting method
(`piwe`) of @Goloboff1993 [@Goloboff2008] was used in TNT. This
down-weights multiple changes in homoplastic characters, so that they
have less effect on the resulting topology. The amount of down weighting
is controlled by the concavity constant, *k*: higher values successively
reduce the influence of homoplasy. What value *k* should take is
variable and untested. @Smith2014 include a TNT script that does
multiple runs under various values of *k* taken from a log-normal
distribution, which can then be examined. This was modified to include
rounds of TBR and PCR pruning, and to expedite the analysis
([\[appB:Phylocode-4PIWE,lst:piwe\]](#appB:Phylocode-4PIWE,lst:piwe){reference-type="ref"
reference="appB:Phylocode-4PIWE,lst:piwe"}).

### Tree selection {#sys:MethodsBestTree}

A combination of tests were used to select trees. The best trees
resulting from the above analyses were summarised into consensus trees:
strict and 50% majority rule. Individual best trees were then compared
using Templeton tests under maximum parsimony in PAUP\* version 4.0a146
[@Swofford1998], and approximate unbiased tests under maxmimum
likelihood using RAxML and CONSEL [@Shimodaira2001]. The most likely
tree and the maximum agreement subtree of the MPTs were compared with
marginal likelihoods under Bayesian likelihood using a stepping-stone
analysis in MrBayes [@Xie2011]. With this, we attempted to reject the
consensus trees under alternative inference criteria. The recent work of
@Wright2014 [@OReilly2016] has shown that Bayesian inference produces
the most accurate trees in analyses of morphological data; we therefore
use this criterion as the null hypothesis to test against.

\>lS Taxon & Completeness (%)\
Leninia stellans & 24.6\
Platypterygius hauthali & 13.1\
Stenopterygius aaleniensis & 55.7\
Temnodontosaurus eurycephalus & 22.3\
Temnodontosaurus nuertingensis & 24.6\
[Node 167:]{.roman} Platypterygius australis & P. americanus &\

\

Results {#sys:Results}
-------

Concatabomination analysis identified two problematic taxa that could be
removed: *Dearcmhara shawcrossi* and *Isfjordosaurus minor*
([2.3](#fig:concatabom){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:concatabom"}). With the removal of these taxa, no other
redundant similarities between taxa were identified. *Pervushovisaurus
bannovkensis* and *Platypterygius hauthali* were considered similar, but
not excluded as they preserve different parts of the skeleton well.
Additionally, the following taxa were coded, but excluded:

-   *Cymbospondylus piscosus* was included as the type species of
    *Cymbospondylus*, but due to its incomplete and uncertain nature
    [@McGowan2003 66], could only be coded for four characters (\<2%),
    so was excluded.

-   *Himalayasaurus tibetensis* is known only from isolated limb
    material [@Motani1997a], so was excluded

-   *Ichthyosaurus acutirostris* is taxonomically vague and difficult to
    code due to poor description and uncertaintly of assigned material.

-   *Maiaspondylus lindoei* was excluded as material is only known for
    this taxon from juveniles. Ontogenetic changes in morphology are
    known to occur in ichthyosaurs, and may affect the coding
    [@McGowan1973a; @Motani1998c; @Dick2016], thus skewing the resultant
    topology.

-   *Platypterygius bedengensis* was excluded as the data on this taxa
    is incomplete and coding is uncertain.

-   *Quasianosteosaurus vikinghoegdai* is known only from a mould of the
    posterior skull [@Maisch2003c], so was excluded due to
    incompleteness of the material.

-   *Thaisaurus chonglakmanii* is poorly known and only described
    briefly by @Mazin1991 and the material is not completely prepared.
    @McGowan2003 [63] suggested that this may represent a specimen of
    *Chaohusaurus* and that the original description include
    discrpancies to the material itself.

-   *Tholodus schmidi* is also poorly known and described, and is
    taxonomically ambiguous, having been allied to Omphalosauridae,
    which is also excluded. This taxon was therefore excluded also.

The analyses reported below were carried out after removal of these
taxa.

![Identification of similar and redundant taxa using the
Concatabominations extension of STR [@Siu-Ting2015; @Wilkinson1995].
Larger, redder nodes indicate greater number of links, indicated by
paths; self-referential paths have been removed, as have non-redundant
taxa. Two taxa are identified as being equally problematic: *Dearcmhara
shawcrossi* and *Isfjordosaurus minor*, which were both excluded from
phylogenetic analysis. [\[fig:concatabom\]]{#fig:concatabom
label="fig:concatabom"}](./img/fig-concatabominations.pdf){#fig:concatabom
width="\\textwidth"}

All analyses find similar topologies in their resulting best or most
likely trees
([\[fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:RAxMLtree,fig:PIWEtree\]](#fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:RAxMLtree,fig:PIWEtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:RAxMLtree,fig:PIWEtree"}).
Successive ingroup clades are mostly 'ladderised', representing stepwise
evolution where each clade is marked by a gradual acquisition of
characters from its outgroup. Several genera are found to be
monophyletic throughout all analyses, such as *Toretocnemus,
Cymbospondylus* -- excluding *Cymbospondylus piscosus* --
*Qianichthyosaurus,* and *Shastasaurus*, even when member species were
largely incomplete. A monophyletic Mixosauridae, or part thereof, is
also recovered. However, there are several clades that repeatedly form
unresolved polytomies in consensus -- particularly the most basal
ichthyosaurs and the Ophthalmosauridae. Removing the least complete taxa
improves the resolution of the basal ichthyosaurs greatly, removing
these polytomies almost entirely in the parsimony analyses.

The term 'core' is used here to mean the monophyletic-genus clade
including most species, and specifically the type species of a genus.

![Consensus trees of 756 most parsimonious trees recovered from equal
weights maximum parsimony analysis in TNT (1597 steps). **a**, strict
consensus: CI = 0.197, RI = 0.625, RCI = 0.123. **b**, 50% majority rule
consensus: CI = 0.200, RI = 0.632, RCI = 0.126. Node labels indicate
support for each resolved node: decay index (upright, above branches)
and symmetrical resampling per cent (italic, below branches) (**a**);
per cent node recovery less than 100% from all MPTs (**b**).
Abbreviations: **A**, Ichthyosauria; **B**, Baracromia; **E**,
Eoichthyosauria; **I**, Ichthyosauriformes; **L**, Leptonectidae; **M**,
Merriamosauria; **N**, Neoichthyosauria; **O**, Ophthalmosauridae;
**P**, Parvipelvia; **S**, Shastasauria; **U**, Euichthyosauria; **X**,
Mixosauridae. [\[fig:TNTtree\]]{#fig:TNTtree
label="fig:TNTtree"}](./img/fig-TNT-fulltree.pdf "fig:"){#fig:TNTtree
height="0.8\\textheight"} [\[fig:TNTstrict\]]{#fig:TNTstrict
label="fig:TNTstrict"} [\[fig:TNTmajority\]]{#fig:TNTmajority
label="fig:TNTmajority"}

### Parsimony analysis {#sys:ResultsParsimony}

Parsimony analysis found 756 shortest trees with length 1597 steps. The
strict consensus is almost completely resolved, with seven polytomies
([\[fig:TNTstrict\]](#fig:TNTstrict){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTstrict"}): two basally (*Parvinatator wapitiensis* +
*Ichthyosaurus communis*; *Utatsusaurus hataii* + *Ichthyosaurus
communis*), one at the base of Thunnosauria (*Temnodontosaurus
trigonodon* + *Ichthyosaurus communis*), and three within
Ophthalmosauridae (*Palvennia hoybergeti* + *Arthropterygius chrisorum*;
*Stenopterygius aaleniensis* + *Platypterygius hercynicus*;
*Undorosaurus gorodischensis* + *Caypullisaurus bonapartei*;
*Platypterygius hercynicus* + *Pervushovisaurus bannovkensis*).
Resolution is slightly increased in the 50% majority rule tree
([\[fig:TNTmajority\]](#fig:TNTmajority){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTmajority"}). The consistency (CI) and retention
indices (RI) for both strict consensus and 50% majority rule trees are
low: CI = 0.197 and 0.200; RI = 0.625 and 0.632 respectively; rescaled
consistency indices (RCI) = 0.123 and 0.126 respectively. All clades
have a Bremmer support value ≥1; several clades have support ≥3.
Resampling values were, however, low: few clades have support ≥50%; the
highest support was found for core *Stenopterygius* (92%) and
*Toretocnemus* (81%). Regions of instability are shown in consensus
network largely around the base of Neoichthyosauria and
Ophthalmosauridae
([\[fig:TNTsplits\]](#fig:TNTsplits){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTsplits"}; [@Holland2003; @Huson2006]).

![Pruned consensus trees of 756 most parsimonious trees recovered from
equal weights maximum parsimony analysis in TNT (1597 steps) with 6 taxa
pruned using PCR pruning. **a**, strict consensus: CI = 0.207,
RI = 0.629, RCI = 0.130. **b**, 50% majority rule consensus: CI = 0.207,
RI = 0.630, RCI = 0.131. Node labels indicate support for each resolved
node: decay index (upright, above branches) and symmetrical resampling
per cent (italic, below branches) (**a**); per cent node recovery less
than 100% from all MPTs (**b**). Node numbers referred to by
optimisation of apomorphies
([5.5](#appB:Apomorphies){reference-type="ref"
reference="appB:Apomorphies"}) are adjacent to the referred node and in
condensed bold font. Abbreviations: **A**, Ichthyosauria; **B**,
Baracromia; **E**, Eoichthyosauria; **I**, Ichthyosauriformes; **L**,
Leptonectidae; **M**, Merriamosauria; **N**, Neoichthyosauria; **O**,
Ophthalmosauridae; **P**, Parvipelvia; **S**, Shastasauria; **U**,
Euichthyosauria; **X**, Mixosauridae. Node-based taxa are indicated at
the node; stem-based taxa are indicated on the branch with an arrow.
Ichthyosaur grades ([2.6.1](#sys:cladesgrades){reference-type="ref"
reference="sys:cladesgrades"}, [after @Motani2005]) are indicated:
green, basal grade; orange, intermediate grade (early and late subgrades
indicated by light and dark orange respectively); blue, fish-shaped
grade. (Continued overleaf.) [\[fig:TNTprunedtree\]]{#fig:TNTprunedtree
label="fig:TNTprunedtree"}](./img/fig-TNT-pruntree.pdf "fig:"){#fig:TNTprunedtree
height="0.75\\textheight"}
[\[fig:TNTprunedstrict\]]{#fig:TNTprunedstrict
label="fig:TNTprunedstrict"}
[\[fig:TNTprunedmajority\]]{#fig:TNTprunedmajority
label="fig:TNTprunedmajority"}

PCR pruning identified five OTUs and one node to remove
([\[tbl:TNTprunings\]](#tbl:TNTprunings){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:TNTprunings"}). These represent some of the least known
of the included taxa, but these may still be coded for many characters
(i.e. *Stenopterygius aaleniensis*). The resultant pruned tree
([2.5](#fig:TNTprunedtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTprunedtree"}) has slightly greater resolution in basal
Neoichthyosauria and Ophthalmosauridae. The CI, RI, and RCI values are
also increased by removing taxa, to 0.207, 0.629, and 0.130 in strict
consensus and 0.207, 0.630, and 0.131 for the 50% majority rule
consensus respectively.

![Most likely tree found in a maximum likelihood analysis of the data
matrix with 98 ichthyosaur taxa and one outgroup taxon in RAxML. Branch
lengths are shown, and clade bootstrap supports (10 000 replicates) are
indicated at the nodes. Major clades discussed in
[2.5](#sys:SystematicPalaeontology){reference-type="ref"
reference="sys:SystematicPalaeontology"} are marked: **A**,
Ichthyosauria; **B**, Baracromia; **E**, Eoichthyosauria; **I**,
Ichthyosauriformes; **L**, Leptonectidae; **M**, Merriamosauria; **N**,
Neoichthyosauria; **O**, Opthalmosauridae; **P**, Parvipelvia; **S**,
Shastasauria; **T**, Thunnosauria; **U**, Euichthyosauria; **X**,
Mixosauridae; node-based taxa are indicated at the node; stem-based taxa
are indicated on the branch with an arrow.
[\[fig:RAxMLtree\]]{#fig:RAxMLtree
label="fig:RAxMLtree"}](./img/fig-RAxML-besttree.pdf){#fig:RAxMLtree
width="\\textwidth"}

### Maximum likelihood analysis {#sys:ResultsRAxML}

The most likely tree found using RAxML is similar to the majority rule
parsimony tree ([2.6](#fig:RAxMLtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:RAxMLtree"}). The basal taxa are paraphyletic with
respect to Ichthyosauria, and the overall topology comprises a series of
nested ingroups. Bootstrap supports are generally low, particularly for
the backbone of the tree. Several small clades do receive values
\>50% -- e.g. *Toretocnemus* (92%), core *Ophthalmosaurus* (64%),
*Chaohusaurus geishanensis* + *Chaohusaurus chaoxianensis* (88%), and
Parvipelvia (54%). Twenty-six bootstrap recovered trees in the
unconstrained analysis were found to not be significantly worse than the
most likely tree (5%) using SH-tests (360 were not significantly worse
at 2%; 1110 were not significantly worse at 1% significance).

![50% majority rule consensus tree of Bayesian-inference maximum
likelihood analysis in MrBayes under equal distribution site rate
variation showing branch lengths and clade credibility values to the
left of nodes (per cent). Major clades discussed in
[2.5](#sys:SystematicPalaeontology){reference-type="ref"
reference="sys:SystematicPalaeontology"} are marked: **A**,
Ichthyosauria; **B**, Baracromia; **E**, Eoichthyosauria; **I**,
Ichthyosauriformes; **L**, Leptonectidae; **M**, Merriamosauria; **N**,
Neoichthyosauria; **O**, Opthalmosauridae; **P**, Parvipelvia; **S**,
Shastasauria; **U**, Euichthyosauria; **X**, Mixosauridae; node-based
taxa are indicated at the node; stem-based taxa are indicated on the
branch with an arrow. [\[fig:MrBayesequaltree\]]{#fig:MrBayesequaltree
label="fig:MrBayesequaltree"}](./img/fig-MrBayes-equal.pdf){#fig:MrBayesequaltree
width="\\textwidth"}

![50% majority rule consensus tree of Bayesian-inference maximum
likelihood analysis in MrBayes under gamma distribution site rate
variation showing branch lengths and clade credibility values to the
left of nodes (per cent). Major clades discussed in
[2.5](#sys:SystematicPalaeontology){reference-type="ref"
reference="sys:SystematicPalaeontology"} are marked: **A**,
Ichthyosauria; **E**, Eoichthyosauria; **I**, Ichthyosauriformes; **O**,
Opthalmosauridae; **P**, Parvipelvia; **S**, Shastasauria; **U**,
Euichthyosauria; **X**, Mixosauridae; node-based taxa are indicated at
the node; stem-based taxa are indicated on the branch with an arrow.
[\[fig:MrBayesgammatree\]]{#fig:MrBayesgammatree
label="fig:MrBayesgammatree"}](./img/fig-MrBayes-gamma.pdf){#fig:MrBayesgammatree
width="\\textwidth"}

![Prior and posterior tree length and alpha distributions for Bayesian
inference maximum likelihood analyses in MrBayes. Tree length in the
equal rates analysis **A** and tree length and alpha for the gamma
distribution **B,C** are shown. Overlapping distributions for the four
runs indicates convergence, but these are different to the priors used.
[\[fig:MrBayespriors\]]{#fig:MrBayespriors
label="fig:MrBayespriors"}](./img/fig-MrBayes-dist.pdf){#fig:MrBayespriors}

### Bayesian-inference analysis {#sys:ResultsBayesian}

Analysis in MrBayes converged in both cases, but the resultant consensus
trees are poorly resolved
([\[fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree\]](#fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree"}); increasing the
number of generations did not improve this. The posterior distributions
in all cases overlap, but are different to the prior distributions
([2.9](#fig:MrBayespriors){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MrBayespriors"}). The gamma-distribution variation rates
prior is strongly supported over the equal-rates prior (δB = 86.3;
[@Kass1995]; ; [5.6](#appB:Bayesfactors){reference-type="ref"
reference="appB:Bayesfactors"}), so discussion will focus on this
analysis.

Three large polytomies are found in each tree for the Triassic, Lower
Jurassic, and post-Lower Jurassic taxa. Unlike other analyses, clade
credibility values, where resolved, are often high --
e.g. *Toretocnemus* (96% and 92% for equal and gamma analyses
respectively), core *Ophthalmosaurus* (97% and 90%), and
*Suevoleviathan* (95% and 65%). Core *Stenopterygius* is not resolved as
monophyletic, despite being strongly supported in other analyses.
Additionally, the MrBayes analyses were the only to resolve
*Hudsonelpidia brevirostris* in consensus. Several clades were resolved,
or more credible, with the gamma-distribution site variation prior that
were not resolved under equal-distribution -- e.g. Mixosauridae and core
*Ichthyosaurus* -- and vice versa -- e.g. the clade *Arthropterygius
chrisorum* + *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, and the paraphyletic basal
parvipelvians *Leptonectes solei, Leptonectes tenuirostris,* and
*Temnodontosaurus azerguensis*.

![50% majority rule superconsensus tree of pruned consensus trees from
maximum parsimony analysis of the ichthyosaur data matrix in TNT using
implied weights with 100 concavity constants taken from a log-normal
distribution. Numbers next to nodes indicate per cent recovery of the
node in the 100 consensus trees. Major clades discussed in
[2.5](#sys:SystematicPalaeontology){reference-type="ref"
reference="sys:SystematicPalaeontology"} are marked: **A**,
Ichthyosauria; **E**, Eoichthyosauria; **I**, Ichthyosauriformes; **N**,
Neoichthyosauria; **O**, Opthalmosauridae; **P**, Parvipelvia; **S**,
Shastasauria; **T**, Thunnosauria; **U**, Euichthyosauria; **X**,
Mixosauridae; node-based taxa are indicated at the node; stem-based taxa
are indicated on the branch with an arrow.
[\[fig:PIWEtree\]]{#fig:PIWEtree
label="fig:PIWEtree"}](./img/fig-PIWE-majoritytree.pdf){#fig:PIWEtree
height="0.8\\textheight"}

### Implied weighting parsimony analysis {#sys:ResultsPIWE}

Under implied weights, only the clades *Eurhinosaurus longirostris* +
*Excalibosaurus costini* and core *Stenopterygius* were recovered for
all values of *k* (excluding the ichthyosauriform ingroup;
[2.10](#fig:PIWEtree){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:PIWEtree"}).
Several other monophyletic groups were found for over 70% of all
*k*-values: *Guizhouichthyosaurus, Qianichthyosaurus, Suevoleviathan,
Toretocnemus,* Euichthyosauria, Parvipelvia, Baracromia, and
Ophthalmosauridae. As with the other analyses, poorly resolved portions
of the tree are found in the basal Ichthyosauriformes, basal
Neoichthyosauria, and Ophthalmosauridae.

### Best tree {#sys:ResultsBestTree}

Templeton tests found the MPTs to be the best; all other trees (found by
maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference) were significantly worse
(p \< 0.05). Approximately unbiased tests found the MLT to be the best;
907 trees were significantly different from this tree (p \< 0.05). Of
these significantly different trees, 103 were MPTs, 183 from the
Bayesian posterior distribution, and 621 from the ML bootstrap search.
Under Bayesian inference, the consensus-MPT and MLT were significantly
worse than the BIT (δB \> 900). Following @OReilly2016, we select the
Bayesian inference tree with gamma-distribution rates changes as the
best tree [2.8](#fig:MrBayesgammatree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MrBayesgammatree"}, but infer unresolved relationships
within that tree based on consensus in the other trees found.

Systematic Palaeontology {#sys:SystematicPalaeontology}
------------------------

The following taxonomy is based upon the preferred phylogeny
([\[sys:ResultsBestTree,fig:MrBayesgammatree\]](#sys:ResultsBestTree,fig:MrBayesgammatree){reference-type="ref"
reference="sys:ResultsBestTree,fig:MrBayesgammatree"}). Unambiguous
synapomorphies optimised in TNT are listed (see
[5.5](#appB:Apomorphies){reference-type="ref"
reference="appB:Apomorphies"}) where the same clade is resolved for that
tree. Discussion is made between the topologies found in the analysis
and in previous studies.

\[System of Ichthyosauromorpha taken from the preferred
phylogeny\]System of Ichthyosauromorpha taken from the preferred
phylogeny. This is based on the preferred phylogeny
([2.8](#fig:MrBayesgammatree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MrBayesgammatree"}), with additional labels based on
consensus between topology from all other analyses. Monophyletic genera
(or parts thereof) or included on single lines.

### Clade ICHTHYOSAUROMORPHA [Motani, -@Motani2014a] {#sys:Ichthyosauromorpha}

#### Phylogenetic definition

The last common ancestor of *Hupehsuchus nanchangensis* and
*Ichthyosaurus communis*, and all of its descendants \[node-based\]
[@Motani2014a].

#### Discussion

@Motani1999c suggested the name Ichthyosauromorpha for the stem-based
equivalent definition of his Ichthyopterygia as the maximally inclusive
clade of ichthyosaurs, but refrained from a formal proposition, as the
sister group was then uncertain. Recent discovery and redescription of
several hupehsuchids has shown that this clade is consistently found as
the sister to ichthyosaurs [@Chen2014; @Chen2014a]. A new analysis by
@Motani2014a found *Chaohusaurus* and *Cartorhynchus* to be the most
basal ichthyosaur taxa. They erected Ichthyosauromorpha and
Ichthyosauriformes for the node that includes *Hupehsuchus
nanchangensis *+ *Ichthyosaurus communis*, and the stem that includes
*Ichthyosaurus communis* but not *Hupehsuchus nanchangensis*
respectively, but no definitions were formally emended.

### Clade ICHTHYOSAURIFORMES [Motani, -@Motani2014a] {#sys:Ichthyosauriformes}

#### Phylogenetic definition

The most inclusive clade that includes *Ichthyosaurus communis*, but not
*Hupehsuchus nanchangensis* \[stem-based\] [@Motani2014a].

#### Discussion

@Motani2014a found *Chaohusaurus* and *Cartorhynchus* to be the most
basal ichthyosauriform taxa, and indicated in their fig. 4 that
Ichthyopterygia was at the node that includes *Chaohusaurus* and all
other ichthyosaurs, but no definitions were formally emended. Here, the
most recent definitions of @Motani1999c are used in assigning names to
these clades. Following Motani's [-@Motani1999c] definition,
Ichthyopterygia is positioned at the more derived node (last common
ancestor of *Utatsusaurus hataii, Parvinatator wapitiensis* and
*Ichthyosaurus communis*).

The relationships of basal ichthyosaur taxa are complex and variable
(e.g. [\[fig:TNTsplits\]](#fig:TNTsplits){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTsplits"}). The most basal ichthyosaur taxa are not
resolved at all in either the parsimony analyses or maximum likelihood
analysis in MrBayes
([\[fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree,fig:PIWEtree\]](#fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree,fig:PIWEtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree,fig:PIWEtree"}).
However, the vast majority of recovered trees (99% in both
[\[fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree\]](#fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree"}; the RAxML best tree:
[2.6](#fig:RAxMLtree){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:RAxMLtree"};
MrBayes trees:
[\[fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree\]](#fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree"}; and PIWE tree:
[2.10](#fig:PIWEtree){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:PIWEtree"})
find *Cartorhynchus lenticarpus* to be the most basal ichthyosauriform
and a monophyletic *Chaohusaurus* as the immediate ingroup
[@Motani2014a]. *Parvinatator wapitiensis* is typically found as one of
the most basal Ichthyosauriformes
[@Motani1999c; @Frobisch2013; @Cuthbertson2013; @Cuthbertson2013a],
either as sister to *Chaohusaurus* under maximum parsimony
([\[fig:TNTmajority,fig:TNTprunedmajority\]](#fig:TNTmajority,fig:TNTprunedmajority){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTmajority,fig:TNTprunedmajority"}), or sister to
Eoichthyosauria in maximum likelihood
([2.6](#fig:RAxMLtree){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:RAxMLtree"}).
*Thaisaurus chonglakmanii* is also found basally, close to *Parvinatator
wapitiensis* [@Maisch2000c].

### Clade EOICHTHYOSAURIA [Motani, -@Motani1999c] {#sys:Eoichthyosauria}

#### Phylogenetic definition

The last common ancestor of *Grippia longirostris* and *Ichthyosaurus
communis*, and all its descendants \[node-based\] [@Motani1999c].

#### Synapomorphies

No contact between jugal and squamosal \[`31:1→0`\]; anterior terrace of
the supratemporal fenestra present \[`73:0→1`\]; femur much longer than
more distal elements \[`267:1→0`\].

#### Discussion

This poorly supported clade is poorly resolved at the base, with
*Grippia longirostris* in a polytomy with *Gulosaurus helmi,
Utatsusaurus hataii,* and Ichthyosauria. Under the original definition,
*Chaohusaurus* was included as the sister to *Grippia* in the Grippidia
[@Motani1999c].

There is uncertainty about the relative positions of *Grippia
longirostris* and *Utatsusaurus hataii*, with both being found as the
more basal taxon previously (e.g. *Grippia longirostris*:
[@Sander2000; @Maisch2000c]; *Utatsusaurus hataii*:
[@Motani1999c; @Cuthbertson2013; @Cuthbertson2013a; @Frobisch2013]). In
the strict consensus presented here, these taxa are not resolved, but
there is evidence for *Grippia longirostris* being the most basal taxon
(all MPTs in
[\[fig:TNTmajority,fig:TNTprunedmajority\]](#fig:TNTmajority,fig:TNTprunedmajority){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTmajority,fig:TNTprunedmajority"}; and in maximum
likelihood [2.6](#fig:RAxMLtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:RAxMLtree"}). There is unlikely to be a clade Grippidia,
as recovered by @Motani1999c [@Maisch2000c; @Cuthbertson2013a]:
*Chaohusaurus* is typically found more basally
([2.5.2](#sys:Ichthyosauriformes){reference-type="ref"
reference="sys:Ichthyosauriformes"}), and *Gulosaurus helmi* is in a
more derived position within Ichthyosauria
([2.5.4](#sys:Ichthyosauria){reference-type="ref"
reference="sys:Ichthyosauria"}).

### Clade ICHTHYOSAURIA [de Blainville, -@deBlainville1835] {#sys:Ichthyosauria}

#### Phylogenetic definition

All taxa more closely related to *Ichthyosaurus communis* than to
*Grippia longirostris* \[stem-based\] [@Motani1999c].

#### Synapomorphies

Frontal with temporal process \[`40:0→1`\]; frontal participates in
supratemporal fenestra \[`41:0→1`\].

#### Discussion

The term Ichthyosauria was erected at class level by @deBlainville1835
to include the species *Ichthyosaurus*, which was the only named genus
at that time. Later, @Owen1859 placed ichthyosaurs in the Order
Ichthyopterygia, within the Class Reptilia. Again, *Ichthyosaurus* was
then the only known ichthyosaur, but this genus then included specimens
that would later be split into the genera *Leptonectes, Mixosaurus,
Stenopterygius,* and *Temnodontosaurus*. @Wiman1929 originally included
*Grippia* in an order separate from Ichthyosauria, but later suggested
that both these should be included as suborders within Order
Ichthyopterygia [@Wiman1933]. @Mazin1982 followed this, in portraying
Ichthyopterygia to include all ichthyosaurs *sensu lato*, with an
ingroup clade Ichthyosauria that excluded mixosaurids, *Grippia
longirostris, Phalarodon fraasi,* and *Omphalosaurus*. In revising this,
@Motani1999c redefined Ichthyopterygia based on the reversed topology of
*Grippia* and *Utatsusaurus*: following Mazin's [-@Mazin1982]
definitions on Motani's [-@Motani1999c] topology would place
Ichthyopterygia as a clade within Ichthyosauria, respecting the relative
position from their Linnean origins (order- vs. class-level
respectively). The resolution of taxa in the preferred phylogeny means
that Ichthyopterygia and Ichthyosauria define similar clades, albeit
with node-based versus stem-based definitions. In this case, the elder
nomen Ichthyosauria is preferentially retained, with the stem-based
definition applied by @Motani1999c.

*Utatsusaurus hataii* is a likely new addition to Ichthyosauria,
supported by all MPTs
([\[fig:TNTmajority,fig:TNTprunedmajority\]](#fig:TNTmajority,fig:TNTprunedmajority){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTmajority,fig:TNTprunedmajority"}) and maximum
likelihood ([2.6](#fig:RAxMLtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:RAxMLtree"}). *Thalattoarchon saurophagis* and
*Xinminosaurus catactes* form unlikely sister taxa, with *Thalattoarchon
saurophagis* being found more basally, and *Xinminosaurus catactes* more
derived than recovered by @Frobisch2013. However, @Motani2014a does
recover the latter taxon as sister to a monophyletic *Cymbospondylus* --
excluding *Cymbospondylus piscosus* -- which is found in the maximum
parsimony analyses
([\[fig:TNTprunedmajority,fig:TNTmajority\]](#fig:TNTprunedmajority,fig:TNTmajority){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTprunedmajority,fig:TNTmajority"}). Unlike some
previous studies, *Cymbospondylus* is often found more basal than
Mixosauridae [@Maisch2000c; @Sander2000; @Frobisch2013], but is not
associated with a larger Shastasauria as in @Callaway1989
[@Nicholls2001; @Frobisch2006], nor does it fall close to
*Mikadocephalus gracilirostris* as found by @Jiang2005a.

### Clade MIXOSAURIDAE  [Baur, -@Baur1887] {#sys:Mixosauridae}

#### Emended phylogenetic definition

All taxa more closely related to *Mixosaurus cornalianus* than to
*Ichthyosaurus communis* \[stem-based\].

#### Synapomorphies

Premaxilla with supranarial process \[`1:0→1`\]; maxilla meets
prefrontal \[`13:0→1`\]; prefrontal broadly exposed \[`34:1→0`\];
suprtemporal with broad sheet overhanging supratemporal fenestra
\[`62:0→1`\]; large anterior terrace to supratemporal fenestra
\[`74:0→1`\]; flat posterior tooth crown \[`148:0→1`\]; centrum \<2×
larger than neural arch \[`155:0→1`\]; obturator foramen enclosed in
pubis \[`263:1→0`\].

#### Discussion

Motani's [-@Motani1999c] original definition of his Mixosauria used
*Mixosaurus cornalianus* and *Mixosaurus nordenskioeldii*. The latter of
these taxa is now considered a *nomen dubium* [@Schmitz2005]. In
redefining this clade, a stem-based definition is preferred that
includes all similar taxa. These taxa are known from good specimens,
with well-defined synapomorphies, but their internal taxonomy is in need
of revision. This redefinition aims to provide stability to the clade.
@Sander2000 and @Maisch2000c disagreed with Motani's [-@Motani1999c]
renaming the historical Mixosauridae as Mixosauria, and Mixosauridae has
been the most used name for this clade since, so is utilised here.

Mixosauridae is one of the few monophyletic clades recovered in strict
consensus of the unpruned parsimony analysis
([\[fig:TNTstrict\]](#fig:TNTstrict){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTstrict"}), however, this clade is only found found in
the gamma-rates MrBayes analyses
([2.8](#fig:MrBayesgammatree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MrBayesgammatree"}). The topologies recovered are more
similar to @Jiang2005a than to @Jiang2006: there is no internal
dichotomy of mixosaurids, and neither *Mixosaurus* nor *Phalarodon* is
recovered as monophyletic in strict consensus, although *Mixosaurus* is
paraphyletic in majority rule parsimony and in the RAxML best trees
([\[fig:RAxMLtree,fig:TNTmajority,fig:TNTprunedmajority\]](#fig:RAxMLtree,fig:TNTmajority,fig:TNTprunedmajority){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:RAxMLtree,fig:TNTmajority,fig:TNTprunedmajority"}). The
inclusion of *Tholodus schmidi* in this clade is largely based upon
general similarities in teeth morphology. Under implied weights, two
main clades are recovered in the basal polytomy
([2.10](#fig:PIWEtree){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:PIWEtree"}):
*Mixosaurus cornalianus* + *Mixosaurus kuhnschneyderi* and
*Contectopalatus atavus* + *Phalarodon fraasi* -- i.e. a *'Phalarodon'*
clade.

### Clade MERRIAMOSAURIA [Motani, -@Motani1999c] {#sys:Merriamosauria}

#### Phylogenetic definition

The last common ancestor of *Shastasaurus pacificus* and *Ichthyosaurus
communis*, and all its descendants \[node-based\] [@Motani1999c].

#### Synapomorphies

Skull roof with moderate posterior indentation \[`75:0→1`\]; pterygoid
with posterolateral transverse flange \[`88:0→1`\]; paired carotid
foramen \[`102:1→0`\]; T-shaped interclavicle \[`180:1→2`\]; humerus
anterior margin with small central notch \[`198:0→1`\]; three distal
carpals \[`236:1→2`\]; four or fewer ossified elements in the manual
metacarpal row \[`240:1→0`\]; manual metacarpal I absent \[`243:0→1`\];
manual metacarpals II & IV rounded \[`245:0→1`\]; manual metacarpal V
absent \[`246:0→1`\]; proximal phalanges polygonal \[`249:0→1`\]; pes
digit I absent \[`283:0→1`\]; pedal phalanges polygonal \[`288:0→1`\].

#### Discussion

Merriamosauria is not resolved in the preferred tree
([2.8](#fig:MrBayesgammatree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MrBayesgammatree"};
[@Cuthbertson2013; @Cuthbertson2013a; @Ji2013]), but feature the better
resolved part of the tree -- although not well supported -- under
implied weights ([2.10](#fig:PIWEtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:PIWEtree"}). Many 'shastasaur-grade' ichthyosaurs are
included in Shastasauria as resolved using implied weights, similar to
the topologies recovered by @Motani2014a [@Nicholls2001]
([2.5.7](#sys:Shastasauria){reference-type="ref"
reference="sys:Shastasauria"}). The position of *Guizhouichthyosaurus*
is uncertain as it is often positioned more basally than in
Euichthyosauria by @Sander2011 [fig. 6] (the position of Parvipelvia in
this figure is incorrect following Motani's \[[-@Motani1999c]\]
definition). *Guizhouichthyosaurus* is not included in Shastasauria
under implied weights ([2.10](#fig:PIWEtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:PIWEtree"}; [@Nicholls2001; @DalSasso1996; @Ji2013]), and
is outside Merriamosauria in the RAxML tree
([2.6](#fig:RAxMLtree){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:RAxMLtree"}).
Similarly, both *Qianichthyosaurus* and *Toretocnemus* are monophyletic
and found close to *Shonisaurus popularis*, one of the more derived
non-parvipelvian merriamosaurs.

### Clade SHASTASAURIA [Motani, -@Motani1999c] {#sys:Shastasauria}

#### Phylogenetic definition

All taxa more closely related to *Shastasaurus pacificus* than to
*Ichthyosaurus communis* \[stem-based\] [@Motani1999c].

#### Synapomorphies

Scapula with emarginated anterior margin \[`192:1→0`\]; ilium blade
narrow \[`253:0→1`\]; ischium with convex medial maergin \[`257:0→1`\];
ischium similar size or larger than pubis \[`258:0→1`\].

#### Discussion

This clade is defined as stem-based alongside a polytomy with other taxa
that are usually considered part of this group, or closely related --
'shastasaur-grade', e.g. *Besanosaurus leptorhynchus* and
*Guizhouichthyosaurus*. However, because of this lack of resolution,
this clade, as diagnosed, includes only *Shastasaurus* and
*Besanosaurus* in the preferred tree
([2.8](#fig:MrBayesgammatree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MrBayesgammatree"}).

Shastasauria is recovered similarly in most analyses, containing a
monophyletic *Shastasaurus*
([\[fig:TNTmajority\]](#fig:TNTmajority){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTmajority"}), and *Besanosaurus leptorhynchus* in the
RAxML tree and gamma-rates MrBayes tree
([\[fig:RAxMLtree,fig:MrBayesgammatree\]](#fig:RAxMLtree,fig:MrBayesgammatree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:RAxMLtree,fig:MrBayesgammatree"}). *Guizhouichthyosaurus*
is included in parsimony analysis
([\[fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree\]](#fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree"}). The larger clade found by
@Nicholls2001 is only replicated in implied weights analysis
([2.10](#fig:PIWEtree){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:PIWEtree"}).
The family Shastasauridae suggested by @DalSasso1996 [fig. 24] is not
supported as this grouping is found to be paraphyletic.

### Clade EUICHTHYOSAURIA [Motani, -@Motani1999c] {#sys:Euichthyosauria}

#### Phylogenetic definition

All taxa more closely related to *Ichthyosaurus communis* than to
*Shastasaurus pacificus* \[stem-based\] [@Motani1999c].

#### Synapomorphies

Jugal contacts quadratojugal \[`32:0→1`\]; basioccipital with
notochordal pit \[`94:0→1`\]; articular narrow \[`126:0→1`\]; coracoid
with straight medial symphysis \[`183:0→1`\]; notching on trailing edge
of forelimb elements \[`217:0→1`\]; tibia with straight or convex
anterior margin \[`274:0→1`\]; notching on leading edge of hindlimb
elements \[`284:0→1`\].

#### Discussion

Euichthyosauria defines the branch between the two polytomies of
Merriamosauria and Parvipelvia. Synapomorphies that change towards the
node Parvipelvia \[node 113\] are listed below
([2.5.9](#sys:Parvipelvia){reference-type="ref"
reference="sys:Parvipelvia"}). Motani's [-@Motani1999c] phylogeny
included *Toretocnemus* and *Californosaurus* within Euichthyosauria,
however, these taxa are both found more basally in majority rule maximum
parsimony
([\[fig:TNTprunedmajority\]](#fig:TNTprunedmajority){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTprunedmajority"}).

As the basal Merriamosaurs are poorly resolved in the preferred tree
([2.8](#fig:MrBayesgammatree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MrBayesgammatree"}), there are no non-parvipelvian
euichthyosaurs. Basal euichthyosaurians are well-resolved under
parsimony
[\[fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree\]](#fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree"}). Under maximum likelihood
([2.6](#fig:RAxMLtree){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:RAxMLtree"},
taxa that were found to be outside Merriamosauria are in more derived
positions -- e.g. *Qianichthyosaurus* and *Toretocnemus*
[@Motani1999c; @Motani2014a] -- these taxa were found to be more basal
by @Maisch2000c [@Frobisch2013], but were similarly unresolved by
@Ji2013. Basal euichthyosaurs are the best resolved in
[2.10](#fig:PIWEtree){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:PIWEtree"},
but these clades are only recovered less than 54% of trees. The
immediate sister to Parvipelvia is found to be *Callawayia
neoscapularis* in [2.10](#fig:PIWEtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:PIWEtree"} [@Frobisch2013; @Maisch2000c; @Sander2011].

### Clade PARVIPELVIA [Motani, -@Motani1999c] {#sys:Parvipelvia}

#### Phylogenetic definition

The last common ancestor of *Macgowania janiceps, Hudsonelpidia
brevirostris,* and *Ichthyosaurus communis*, and all of its descendants
\[node-based\] [@Motani1999c].

#### Synapomorphies

Dorsal centra increase in height posteriorly \[`158:0→1`\]; chevrons in
apical region absent \[`176:0→1`\]; scapula without proximal anterior
expansion \[`191:0→1`\]; radius wider than long \[`221:0→1`\]; proximal
intermedium pointed \[`231:0→1`\].

#### Discussion

The original definition of Parvipelvia referred only to the genus
*Ichthyosaurus*, here this is extended and clarified this to the type
species, *Ichthyosaurus communis*. In the preferred tree
([2.8](#fig:MrBayesgammatree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MrBayesgammatree"}), Parvipelvia is recovered as a
monphyletic clade, but has a basal polytomy. *Hudsonelpidia
brevirostris* is recovered as the more basal taxon by @Fischer2013a
[@Frobisch2013]. Here in the equal MrBayes analyses
([2.7](#fig:MrBayesequaltree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MrBayesequaltree"}) and RAxML tree, it is sister to
*Suevoleviathan disinteger*. *Macgowania janiceps* is found to be more
basal by @Motani1999c [@Motani2014a; @Maisch2000c] and here in
[2.6](#fig:RAxMLtree){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:RAxMLtree"}.
Analysis in MrBayes, both in
[\[fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree\]](#fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree"} and by
@Frobisch2013 recovered *Macgowania janiceps* in a more basal position.
There are few definite non-neoichthyosaurian parvipelvians recovered in
most analyses, however, a paraphyletic set of *Leptonectes* and
*Temnodontosaurus azerguensis* are positioned outside Neoichthyosauria
in the equal rates MrBayes analysis and parsimony trees
([\[fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:MrBayesequaltree\]](#fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:MrBayesequaltree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:MrBayesequaltree"};
[@Frobisch2013; @Motani1999c; @Ji2013]). The status of Leptonectidae is
uncertain: it is monophyletic under maximum likelihood
([2.6](#fig:RAxMLtree){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:RAxMLtree"};
[@Motani2014a; @Fischer2013]), but it is recovered as paraphyletic with
respect to Neoichthyosauria under maximum parsimony and equal Bayesian
analysis
([\[fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:MrBayesequaltree\]](#fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:MrBayesequaltree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:MrBayesequaltree"};
[@Maxwell2012b]), and in not recovered at all by the gamma-rates
Bayesian analysis and under implied weights
([\[fig:MrBayesgammatree,fig:PIWEtree\]](#fig:MrBayesgammatree,fig:PIWEtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MrBayesgammatree,fig:PIWEtree"}). The sister relationship
of *Eurhinosaurus longirostris* and *Excalibosaurus costini* is
recovered in all analyses.

### Clade NEOICHTHYOSAURIA [Sander, -@Sander2000] {#sys:Neoichthyosauria}

#### Phylogenetic definition

The last common ancestor of *Temnodontosaurus platyodon* and
*Ichthyosaurus communis* and all its descendants \[node-based\]
[@Sander2000].

#### Synapomorphies

External naris elongate and complexly lobate \[`25:1→2`\]; parietal
foramen approximately equal to anterior edge of supratemporal fenestra
\[`53:1→0`\]; no sagittal eminence \[`65:0→1`\]; parabasisphenoid
rapidly narrows posteriorly \[`105:0→1`\]; rib with figure-of-eight
cross section \[`177:2→1`\]; femur with prominent dorsal and ventral
processes \[`268:0→1`\].

#### Discussion

Neoichthyosauria was erected to include the monophyletic post-Triassic
ichthyosaur taxa [@Sander2000]. The base of this clade is a large
polytomy, and *Temnodontosaurus* is polyphyletic within this clade. The
original definition used only the genus *Ichthyosaurus*; here it is
redefined to the type species *Ichthyosaurus communis*. @Maisch2000c
used a definition involving *Temnodontosaurus platyodon* and
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*, but the emendation from Sander's
[-@Sander2000] original is preferred here.

Neoichthyosauria also includes only post-Triassic taxa in the trees
recovered
([\[fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:RAxMLtree\]](#fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:RAxMLtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:RAxMLtree"}). The inclusion
of *Hudsonelpidia brevirostris* as sister to *Suevoleviathan* in
[\[fig:TNTmajority\]](#fig:TNTmajority){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTmajority"} in only 52% of trees does not suggest that
this position is tenable. Similar to other clades, basal
neoichthyosaurians are recovered in a large polytomy
([\[fig:TNTprunedstrict\]](#fig:TNTprunedstrict){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTprunedstrict"}; [@Maxwell2012b; @Caine2011]), but this
is largely resolved in majority rule with over 80% of trees supporting
many clades
([\[fig:TNTprunedmajority\]](#fig:TNTprunedmajority){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTprunedmajority"}). Under maximum likelihood,
*Temnodontosaurus* and *Suevoleviathan* form a large basal clade, which
has not been found before. There is no evidence for a
*Temnodontosaurus*--Leptonectidae sister relationship
[@Fischer2013a; @Motani2014a; @Frobisch2013].

### Clade THUNNOSAURIA [Motani, -@Motani1999c] {#sys:Thunnosauria}

#### Phylogenetic definition

The last common ancestor of *Stenopterygius quadriscissus* and
*Ichthyosaurus communis,* and all of its descendants \[node-based\]
[@Motani1999c].

#### Discussion

Thunnosauria is not found separately from Neoichthyosauria in either
Bayesian-inference tree
([\[fig:MrBayesgammatree,fig:MrBayesequaltree\]](#fig:MrBayesgammatree,fig:MrBayesequaltree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MrBayesgammatree,fig:MrBayesequaltree"}), but is
recovered in the RAxML and implied weights trees
([\[fig:RAxMLtree,fig:PIWEtree\]](#fig:RAxMLtree,fig:PIWEtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:RAxMLtree,fig:PIWEtree"}. Unexpectedly under maximum
parsimony, Thunnosauria is recovered more basally than Neoichthyosauria
in the pruned tree ([2.4](#fig:TNTtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTtree"}). *Hauffiopteryx typicus* is recovered outside
Thunnosauria under maximum parsimony [@Caine2011
fig. 18b; @Fischer2013a], but is within Thunnosauria under maximum
likelihood [@Marek2015]. *Ichthyosaurus* is monophyletic where resolved
([2.6](#fig:RAxMLtree){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:RAxMLtree"}).

### Clade BARACROMIA [Fischer *et al.*, -@Fischer2013] {#clade-baracromia-fischer-et-al.}

#### Phylogenetic definition

The last common ancestor of *Stenopterygius quadriscissus* and
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus,* and all of its its descendants
\[node-based\] [@Maisch1998].

#### Synapomorphies

Teeth with subtle root striations \[`145:0→1`\]; clavicle without
expanded medial flange \[`181:0→1`\]; humerus longer than wide
\[`201:1→0`\]; humerus with protruding deltopectoral crest
\[`203:0→1`\]; manual pisiform present \[`225:1→0`\]; ischium-pubis with
medial fusion \[`255:0→1`\]; femur without wide distal blade
\[`270:0→1`\].

#### Discussion

Baracromia is not certainly resolved within Neoichthyosauria
([2.8](#fig:MrBayesgammatree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MrBayesgammatree"}). The clade includes *Chacaicosaurus
cayi, Stenopterygius,* and Ophthalmosauridae as found by @Fischer2013a,
but also includes *Malawania anachronus*
([\[fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:PIWEtree,fig:RAxMLtree\]](#fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:PIWEtree,fig:RAxMLtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:PIWEtree,fig:RAxMLtree"}). While
*Stenopterygius quadriscissus* is monophyletic with *Stenopterygius
triscissus* and *Stenopterygius uniter* under maximum parsimony (and
well supported;
[\[fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:PIWEtree\]](#fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:PIWEtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:PIWEtree"}), this is not
recovered under likelihood: in the RAxML tree, the four species of
*Stenopterygius* are paraphyletic with respect to Ophthalmosauridae
([2.6](#fig:RAxMLtree){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:RAxMLtree"}).
*Stenopterygius aaleniensis* is not found as monophyletic with core
*Stenopterygius* [@Maxwell2012b]. *Chacaicosaurus cayi* is only found as
a non-ophthalmosaurid baracromian under equal weights parsimony
[@Fischer2013a; @Fischer2012; @Marek2015]. In implied weights analysis
and the analysis in RAxML, *Chacaicosaurus cayi* is included within
'Ophthalmosauridae' -- taking the branch from *Stenopterygius
aaleniensis* as the inclusive clade:
[2.6](#fig:RAxMLtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:RAxMLtree"}) -- either as sister to *Janusaurus lundi*
([2.6](#fig:RAxMLtree){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:RAxMLtree"}),
or unresolved ([2.10](#fig:PIWEtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:PIWEtree"}).

### Clade OPHTHALMOSAURIDAE [Baur, -@Baur1887] {#sys:Ophthalmosauridae}

#### Emended phylogenetic definition

All taxa more closely related to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and
*Platypterygius hercynicus* than to *Stenopterygius aaleniensis* and
*Chacaicosaurus cayi* \[stem-based\].

#### Synapomorphies

Basioccipital contributes to the floor of the *foramen magnum*
\[`100:0→1`\]; humerus with plate-like dorsal ridge \[`206:0→1`\];
forelimb with no notching of anterior face on leading edge elements
\[`216:0→1`\]; manual preaxial accessory digit present \[`241:0→1`\].

#### Discussion

Following Fischer *et al.*'s [-@Fischer2011c] definition,
Ophthalmosauridae would often refer to a small clade in these results --
last common ancestor of *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and *Arthropterygius
chrisorum* (node 128 in [2.5](#fig:TNTprunedtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTprunedtree"}). To maintain stability in the included
taxa, the definition is extended to formally include *Platypterygius
hercynicus* -- following Fischer *et al.*'s [-@Fischer2012] definitions
of Ophthalmosaurinae and Platypterygiinae -- and exclude *Stenopterygius
aaleniensis* -- the immediate sister taxon to Ophthalmosauridae -- and
*Chacaicosaurus cayi*. While *Chacaicosaurus cayi* is not positioned as
the immediate sister to Ophthalmosauridae in the preferred phylogeny, it
has been recovered as the immediate sister taxon to Ophthalmosauridae
previously [@Fischer2011c]; its more basal position here may be result
of incomplete coding.

Ophthalmosauridae is very poorly resolved in the preferred tree
([\[fig:MrBayesgammatree,fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:PIWEtree\]](#fig:MrBayesgammatree,fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:PIWEtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MrBayesgammatree,fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:PIWEtree"}). As
mentioned above, where resolved, *Arthropterygius chrisorum* is in a
much more derived position as sister to core *Ophthalmosaurus*, rather
than as the most basal ophthalmosaurid
([\[fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:RAxMLtree\]](#fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:RAxMLtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:RAxMLtree"};
[@Fischer2012; @Fischer2013a; @Marek2015]). In the resolved phylogenies
([\[fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:RAxMLtree\]](#fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:RAxMLtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTtree,fig:TNTprunedtree,fig:RAxMLtree"}),
Ophthalmosauridae is divided into two main clades to which the
definitions of Ophthalmosaurinae and Platypterygiinae of @Fischer2012 --
branches closer to *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* or *Platypterygius
hercynicus* respectively -- can be applied, however, the support for
these clades is weak, and they are not recovered in all analyses.
Additionally, the taxic composition of these two clades differs greatly
from that found by @Fischer2012 [@Fischer2013a; @Arkhangelsky2014];
@Marek2015 did not resolve these clades at all. In the RAxML analysis,
the internal relationship of ophthalmosaurids is more a series of nested
ingroups, similar to the topology recovered for the clade by
@Motani2014a [@Druckenmiller2010; @Motani1999].

Discussion {#sys:Discussion}
----------

### Ichthyosaur evolution: clades and grades {#sys:cladesgrades}

In his review of ichthyosaur evolution, @Motani2005 recognised three
grades within ichthyosaur evolution: a basal grade: the Early Triassic
ichthyosaurs, an intermediate grade: Middle--Late Triassic ichthyosaurs,
and a fish-shaped grade: Late Triassic--Cretaceous ichthyosaurs. Each of
these corresponds to a portion of ichthyosaur phylogeny, represented by
several clades within Ichthyosauriformes, monophyletic or paraphyletic.
In the phylogeny presented here
([2.5](#fig:TNTprunedtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTprunedtree"}), the pattern across ichthyosaur
evolution is similar. The other trees presented also pick out these
morphological differences: in
[\[fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree,fig:PIWEtree\]](#fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree,fig:PIWEtree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree,fig:PIWEtree"} the
large polytomies mark these grades. Both the basal and intermediate
grades are paraphyletic with respect to the more derived grades. The
basal ichthyosaur grade, which includes the basal-most ichthyosaurians
and non-ichthyosaurian Ichthyosauriformes, is marked by the relatively
elongate tail, compared to the trunk, and long propodials, and
epipodials, compared to the whole limb, remnants of their terrestrial
ancestry [@Motani2005]. The metapodials too retain the basal
hourglass-like form comparable with more basal diapsids
[@Motani1999c; @McGowan2003].

In the intermediate grade, most non-parvipelvian ichthyosaurians, there
is the gradual acquisition of more fish-like characters: shrinking the
size and increasing the number of limb bones to form paddle-like limbs,
shortening of the caudal vertebrae, so that the tail becomes shorter
relative to the trunk, and the early development of a strong tail bend
[@McGowan2003]. This grade may be divided into two subgrades: the
earlier, Middle Triassic *Cymbospondylus--Mixosaurus* group, and the
Middle--Late Triassic *Shastasaurus--Shonisaurus* group. The former
group includes taxa that represent the early ecological diversification
of ichthyosaurs, with a broad range of body forms habits, associated
with an increase in disparity
[@Massare1987; @Thorne2011; @Frobisch2013]. This is marked in the above
phylogeny by character changes related to the teeth as a synapomorphy of
Mixosauridae (e.g. character `149:0→1`). The more derived members of the
intermediate grade than the mixosaurids, which includes traditional
'shastasaurids', modify the forelimb further than earlier taxa,
particularly through the loss of digits at node 119 and shortening and
rounding of the phalanges at node 118 (see
[5.5](#appB:Apomorphies){reference-type="ref"
reference="appB:Apomorphies"}; [@Thorne2011; @Sander2011; @Motani2013]).

The latest, fish-like grade, including all parvipelvians, represent an
oft-cited example of convergence with modern pelagic fishes
[@Motani1996; @Motani2005]. While this clade is named for the reduction
of the pelvis, this character is not an unambiguous synapomorphy (see
[\[sys:Parvipelvia,appB:Apomorphies\]](#sys:Parvipelvia,appB:Apomorphies){reference-type="ref"
reference="sys:Parvipelvia,appB:Apomorphies"}). However, this clade and
grade are marked by several changes to the pectoral girdle that affect
the form and use of this and the forelimb. Within Parvipelvia, there is
a shift between the basal taxa and the clade Baracromia, which has
several limb-based character changes towards the node. This marks the
later evolution and diversification of this clade and the more derived
Ophthalmosauridae that succeeded from the non-baracromian parvipelvian
ichthyosaurs in the Middle Jurassic-Cretaceous
[@Fischer2012; @Fischer2013a]. With the proposal of the above phylogeny,
it becomes possible to analyse specific traits, discrete and continuous,
across ichthyosaur evolution, and test the reality of the ichthyosaur
evolution as a series of grades ([3](#chapter3){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter3"}).

### Specimen completeness {#sys:Specimencompleteness}

The effects of incomplete taxa have been attributed to a lack of
characters rather than simply the proportion of missing data
[@Wiens2003]. Recently developed metrics to quantify skeletal and
cladistic completeness provide comparative methods that may allow
attribution of completeness [@Mannion2010]. Studies have applied these
to several fossil groups, but only recently to marine reptiles
[@Cleary2015]. While specimen completeness is highly variable through
the Mesozoic, periods of relatively high completeness --
e.g. Rhaetian--Toarcian -- are coincident with occurrence of leaf taxa
in better resolved regions of the trees presented: approximately
Parvipelvia through to Baracromia. Conversely, lowers level of
completeness are found in the Early--Middle Triassic, Middle Jurassic,
and Late Jurassic--Cretaceous, which correspond to the less well
resolved portions of the trees, in the full analyses, at least: basal
ichthyosaurs and *Ophthalmosaurus*, particularly
([\[fig:TNTtree,fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree\]](#fig:TNTtree,fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTtree,fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree"};
[@Cleary2015]). The relationship between skeletal and cladistic
completeness of ichthyosaurs, and other groups, and whether and how this
is reflected in phylogeny reconstructions, has yet to be tested.

### Phylogeny reconstructions {#sys:Phylogenyreconstructions}

Throughout the above analyses, the ichthyosaur matrix has been used as
an exemplar of a palaeontological dataset: purely morphological data,
many taxa are from a few discrete horizons, and completeness varies
greatly between taxa. In previous work on ichthyosaur phylogeny, methods
of phylogeny inference other than maximum parsimony are limited to the
Bayesian inference analysis of @Frobisch2013. Simulation data has
suggested that Bayesian inference can provide increased accuracy of
results over parsimony in palaeontological datasets [@Wright2014].
However, the importance of missing data and its effect on phylogeny
reconstruction is complex
[@Prevosti2010; @Wiens2011; @Simmons2012; @Sansom2014]. Simulations of
data loss have generally focused on formulaic removal, often of a
minority of codings -- e.g. @Wright2014 removed characters with similar
rate changes. The present dataset of ichthyosaurs, however, contains
over 50% uncoded characters. While these missing data are not purely
random, there is a bias towards absence of certain character sets --
e.g. small limb bones, limbs, tail vertebrae, and neural spines.
Currently, there is also no methodological recommendation on how to
treat data codings that are absent because of non-preservation and those
that are inapplicable -- our '`?`' or '`-`' codings -- which result from
the character definition and reductive coding method used
[@Maddison1993; @Brazeau2011].

Resolution of consensus trees may be taken as indication of support for
a certain model, but individual trees found in analysis are usually
binary and only form polytomies in consensus -- as in all methods here.
This is also very much affected by the quality of data: *a posteriori*
analysis and modification of trees -- e.g. by pruning -- will often
provide an increase in resolution and potentially accuracy
[@Pol2009; @Aberer2013]. This method has proved useful here as a faster
alternative to *a priori* STR [@Wilkinson1995; @Siu-Ting2015]. Previous
studies of ichthyosaurs have used an arbitrary proportion of incomplete
characters to remove taxa, presenting this alongside the complete
analysis [@Fischer2013a; @Fischer2014b]. Although this is the simplest
method, it does not always prove the best in resolving relationships
[@Wiens2003]. *A posteriori* identification of unstable taxa allows a
determination of the causes of this instability -- in the case of PCR
pruning by pinpointing conflicting characters [@Pol2009] -- which
provides a useful indication of where the uncertainty lies. This method
is preferred as a means of identifying problematic taxa in phylogenetic
analyses.

The two different topologies found under Bayesian inference imply that
different models support or can resolve different parts of the tree
([\[fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree\]](#fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MrBayesequaltree,fig:MrBayesgammatree"}) -- i.e. there is
rate heterogeneity across the tree, and that different models/priors are
necessary: the posterior distributions found are very different to the
prior distributions ([2.9](#fig:MrBayespriors){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:MrBayespriors"}). This is not surprising, considering
that previous studies have shown that certain parts of ichthyosaur
evolution are punctuated by high cladogenesis rates
[@Fischer2012; @Fischer2013a]. Stratigraphic correlation of trees also
shows the unevenness present [@Motani1999c; @Frobisch2013]. As Bayesian
inference has been shown to be able to recover weak, short branches
[@Alfaro2003], those clades recovered around the base of Parvipelvia in
this analysis may be confidently recognised. This would allow placement
of *Hudsonelpidia brevirostris* in a position similar to what has been
found before [@Fischer2013a; @Motani2014a]. A full investigation of the
effects of Bayesian prior selection is beyond the scope of this study.

Conclusions {#sys:Conclusions}
-----------

1.  Previous hypotheses of ichthyosaur phylogeny are corroborated, but
    individual taxon positions can vary greatly producing topological
    instability and weak support for relationships. Ichthyosaurs present
    a stepwise phylogeny with nested clades separated by acquisition of
    characters. A few monophyletic groups are present, which can be well
    supported, and mark diversification within a particular bauplan --
    e.g. Mixosauridae and Shastasauria.

2.  Non-monophyletic genera reaffirm the need for revision of several
    ichthyosaur taxa, particularly those based on poor diagnoses and
    specimens, or phenetic definitions -- e.g. *Temnodontosaurus,
    Mixosaurus* and *Phalarodon, Ophthalmosaurus, Stenopterygius*, and
    *Platypterygius*.

3.  Unstable ichthyosaur taxa may be the result of inadequate characters
    as well as inadequate coding. An in-depth, critical reevaluation of
    characters is necessary, particularly for those in the most poorly
    resolved clades -- e.g. basal ichthyosauriforms, basal
    merriamosaurians, and ophthalmosaurids. *A posteriori*
    identification of unstable taxa and taxon pruning can provide
    indications of which are inadequately known, and where characters
    may need revision.

4.  Analyses under different phylogeny criteria recover a similar
    overall topology, but the placement of individual taxa varies
    greatly, as does consensus resolution. Differences in the resolution
    of Bayesian inference show that different prior distributions can
    affect the results, and that a simply distributed prior may not be
    most useful. Maximum likelihood methods can struggle to consistently
    resolve topologies. The use of implied weights to reduce homology
    results in less conflicted data, and provides a useful addition to
    the analytical spectrum.

Morphological trends through ichthyosaur evolution {#chapter3}
==================================================

::: {.epigraph}
But how is it that this lives in thy mind? What seest thou else in the
dark backward and abysm of time?

William Shakespeare\
Prospero in *The Tempest* (1.2.48--50)
:::

[ABSTRACT]{.sans-serif}

Ichthyosaurs represent some of the most common marine reptile groups
found through most of the Mesozoic. However, the morphological
similarity of post-Triassic ichthyosaurs has led to suggestions of both
ecological and morphological conservatism and the presence of an
evolutionary bottleneck across the Triassic--Jurassic boundary. Using a
new, complete data matrix of all valid and codable ichthyosaur taxa, the
disparity of the clade is measured through the Mesozoic. Triassic and
post-Triassic ichthyosaurs are found to occupy significantly different
regions of morphospace with a transitory period through the Late
Triassic with the evolution of Parvipelvia and Neoichthyosauria.
Following this, ichthyosaur morphology remains similar through the
Jurassic and Cretaceous. There is a sharp increase in the disparity of
ichthyosaurs between the Early and Middle Triassic followed by stability
through the rest of the Mesozoic, however, the disparity present in any
adjacent two bins is not significantly different. Morphological
diversity is retained despite a continuous replacement of more basal by
more derived clades. Rates of evolution in three continuous characters
(body and skull lengths, and orbital ratio) are mapped onto a new,
species-level phylogeny of ichthyosaurs. Rates of change in skull length
and orbital ratio remain similar across ichthyosaur phylogeny, but there
is a distinct deceleration of change in body size in the Merriamosauria;
this is associated with a decrease in the rate of cladogenesis.
Subsequent increases in the rate of change of these traits occur with
the evolution of the Thunnosauria and its associated bauplan, but
otherwise remain constant through the Jurassic and Cretaceous. These
results suggest conservation of morphology following a morphological
shift in the Late Triassic, but retention of diversity and disparity
through periods of lineage accumulation.

Introduction {#evo:Introduction}
------------

Ichthyosaurs were one of the most common marine tetrapod groups of the
Mesozoic (252--66 Ma), and some of the most completely adapted to an
aquatic existence [@McGowan2003]. Despite showing early high disparity
(morphological diversity), the morphological variation of the group
apparently declined following the end-Triassic extinction (ETE)
approximately 201 Ma [@Thorne2011]. However, recent discovery of new
specimens and reappraisal of taxa [e.g.
@Fischer2014b; @Druckenmiller2012a], and resolution only to genus level,
means that previous analyses have considered only a small portion of
total ichthyosaur diversity. Recent compilation of a new dataset and
phylogeny of ichthyosaurs ([2](#chapter2){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter2"}) allows greater knowledge of their evolution and
interrelationships. With this new data, previous hypotheses of
ichthyosaur evolution are revisited. Particularly, the evidence for a
bottleneck across the Triassic--Jurassic boundary ( TJB) and an
extinction at the Jurassic--Cretaceous boundary ( JCB) is questioned by
measuring the taxic and morphological variation present across these
boundaries [@Thorne2011; @Benson2014; @Bardet1994a; @Bardet1995].
Additionally, the changes in directly measured morphological variables
from ichthyosaurs are plotted onto the phylogeny to assess the incidence
of evolution in specific measures. Do ichthyosaurs show a post-Triassic
decline in morphological variation? and is this associated with any
change of morphology?

History of research {#evo:HOR}
-------------------

### Early studies of ichthyosaur evolution {#evo:horEarlyStudies}

Hypotheses of ichthyosaur relations and evolution have been proposed
since the early 20^th^ century [@Merriam1908; @Huene1922b; @Huene1923a].
These hypotheses were mostly built upon qualitative similarity and with
the background of the latipinnate-longipinnate dichotomy
([2.2.1](#sys:Earlyclassifications){reference-type="ref"
reference="sys:Earlyclassifications"}). More direct morphological
comparisons between taxa were made by @Appleby1961, who used lengths of
the ichthyosaur skull to suggest how its morphology changed through the
evolution of the group. This study particularly considered the
development of the stapes, and the size of the orbit relative to
postnarial skull length. Within the framework of Huene's
[-@Huene1922b; -@Huene1956] phylogeny, @Appleby1961 [fig. 13] suggested
a general increase in orbit size through ichthyosaur evolution at the
expense of the cheek region, as had been suggested by @Merriam1908 [23].

Use of morphological characters was extended with the phenetic studies
of @McGowan1972b [@McGowan1972a; @McGowan1976]. These studies used
several skull ratios in cluster analysis and in morphospace to suggest
affinities between taxa, which led to the questioning of the
latipinnate-longipinnate split [@McGowan1976]. Similar to @Appleby1961,
@McGowan1972a used orbital and narial lengths, but analysed the rate of
change in these in taxa across the Mesozoic. @McGowan1972a found a
decrease in the rate of change of orbit size through longipinnate
evolution and that there was a rapid decrease in narial and sclerotic
ring size (30% and 45% respectively) in the Lower--Upper Lias (Lower
Jurassic) -- this excludes the 'latipinnate' ichthyosaurs
*Ichthyosaurus, Mixosaurus,* and *Ophthalmosaurus*, hence differs from
@Appleby1961. These morphological changes were not accompanied by a
corresponding shift in orbital size, but by a reduction in the size of
the cheek.

Subsequently, continuous characters have been used in the diagnosis of
several ichthyosaur species [e.g.
@McGowan1973; @McGowan1976; @McGowan1979; @McGowan1986]. Beyond this,
comparisons of the overall morphology of sharks and ichthyosaurs have
allowed functional proposals. @Motani1996 [figs 2, 3] compared
morphology using the body 'fineness ratio' (precaudal length ÷ body
height) versus tail height ÷ tail length. They found the morphology of
sharks and ichthyosaurs to be comparable: *Chaohusaurus* is similar to
scyliorhinid sharks -- more anguilliform -- while *Stenopterygius* shows
a more thunniform shape, similar to lamnid sharks.

### Disparity & macroevolution {#evo:horDisparityMacroevolution}

Comparisons of the relative success of a clade or other biological group
have often used raw taxic diversity counts as the main metric, however,
this is susceptible to scale and sampling [@Smith2001; @Benson2012a].
Attempts to neutralise these issues have used alternative methods, such
as the morphological, functional, or ecological diversity [e.g.
@Bush2012; @Anderson2012; @Wills1994]. These metrics aim to quantify the
variation between taxa: few highly diverse taxa count for more than many
very similar taxa [@Wills2001]. The disparity of a clade is the
morphological variation exhibited [@Runnegar1987; @Wills2001]. This
metric has been the most used in the recent palaeontological literature.

Disparity can be measured by two main methods: use of shape analysis
from outline or homologous landmarks, or by using homologous cladistic
character states [@Wills1994; @Wills2001]. The latter method uses the
same data as collected for phylogeny reconstruction
([2](#chapter2){reference-type="ref" reference="chapter2"}), but is not
immediately analysed within a phylogenetic framework, although phylogeny
may be superimposed subsequently and included in disparity analysis
[@Brusatte2011]. Such analyses have been used to investigate the
relative diversity of clades (size of morphospace occupation) and the
region of morphospace occupation through time. For example,
@Brusatte2008 used a cladistic matrix of Archosauria to compare the
relative diversity and disparity of Crurotarsi and Dinosauria through
the Late Triassic--Early Jurassic: the disparity of crurotarsans was
much greater during the Late Triassic than dinosaurs, but this greatly
decreased across the TJB, while dinosaur diversity remained
approximately constant. A more in-depth analysis by @Stubbs2013 used
landmarks and functional characters to assess the disparity of
crurotarsan mandibles from the Late Triassic--Late Cretaceous,
separating the data by clade and by ecology. While a similar decrease
across the TJB was recovered, morphological disparity subsequently
increased through the Late Jurassic and Cretaceous, although
biomechanical disparity did not. This was accompanied by highly diverse
clade representation in partial disparity and a clear loss of
morphospace and biomechanical morphospace ('functionspace') [@Stubbs2013
fig. 3]. Numerous other studies have used these methods to assess the
evolution of diversity and morphology of several clades through time
[e.g. Dinosauria: @Bhullar2012; Pterosauria: @Prentice2011; Metazoa:
@Hughes2013].

### Ichthyosaur macroevolution {#evo:horIchthyosaurMacroevolution}

The recent development of macroevolution metrics and techniques means
that their application to ichthyosaur evolution has been limited. As
mentioned above ([3.2.1](#evo:horEarlyStudies){reference-type="ref"
reference="evo:horEarlyStudies"}), early studies used univariate or
multivariate metrics taken from body lengths and ratios
[@Appleby1961; @McGowan1972b; @McGowan1976]. More recently, advanced
morphometric techniques
([3.2.2](#evo:horDisparityMacroevolution){reference-type="ref"
reference="evo:horDisparityMacroevolution"}) have been applied.

@Thorne2011 used a modified version of the cladistic matrix of
@Motani1999c to assess the variation of the Ichthyopterygia through the
Mesozoic, focusing on the ETE. While this event has been identified as a
time of important ecological turnover, its effect on the diversity of
marine reptiles was clouded by the retention of diversity across the TJB
[@Motani2009; @Tanner2004]. @Thorne2011 found a significant decline in
cladistic disparity across the TJB, whereas raw generic diversity
remained relatively stable, suggesting the presence of an evolutionary
bottleneck. More recently, @Dick2015 used a similar approach, but
included characters considered to be ecologically informative to assess
ecospace occupation across ichthyosaur evolution. Their results show a
shift in the ecology of ichthyosaurs between the Early--Middle Triassic
and the Late Triassic and a subsequent decrease in their ecological
diversity; this latter appears delayed compared to the decrease in
disparity found by @Thorne2011, with the most substantial loss occurring
between the Early Jurassic and Middle Jurassic--Cretaceous time bins
[@Dick2015 fig. 2a].

However, these previous studies have only included limited taxa, related
either to the dataset used -- i.e. the phylogenetic matrix of
@Motani1999c extended by @Thorne2011 -- or resolution only to generic
level -- by both @Thorne2011 [@Dick2015]. While this may not represent a
substantial omission by @Dick2015 -- due to the few characters used and
the likely overlap in the broad ecology of species within genera -- this
may create a gap in disparity and the assessment of morphological
variability in ichthyosaurs through the Mesozoic. Here, the disparity of
ichthyosaurs is analysed using the complete, species-level dataset
presented in [2](#chapter2){reference-type="ref" reference="chapter2"}.

Materials & methods {#evo:Method}
-------------------

### Taxon sampling {#evo:taxa}

Taxon sampling included all 107 ichthyosauriform and one outgroup taxa
included in the phylogenetic analysis of
[2](#chapter2){reference-type="ref" reference="chapter2"}
([\[tbl301\]](#tbl301){reference-type="ref" reference="tbl301"}). Taxa
were coded at species level. Characters coded for each taxon are based
upon total knowledge, including all published referred specimens, but
completeness for each taxon varies greatly between 1.39% for
*Cymbospondylus piscosus* to over 95% in *Ichthyosaurus communis* and
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*. Rates were analysed on subsets of these taxa
as data was available.

### Occurrences {#evo:dates}

Ichthyosaur occurrences were taken from the primary literature (appendix
[\[tbl301\]](#tbl301){reference-type="ref" reference="tbl301"}). As far
as possible, first and last appearances of taxa were recorded to
ammonite or conodont biozone level. Occurrences were converted to dates
using @Gradstein2012 (appendix
[\[tbl301\]](#tbl301){reference-type="ref" reference="tbl301"}). In the
disparity analyses, taxa were initially separated into eight epoch-level
bins: Early Triassic, Middle Triassic, Late Triassic, Early Jurassic,
Middle Jurassic, Late Jurassic, Early Cretaceous, and Late Cretaceous
(appendix [\[tbl302\]](#tbl302){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl302"}; [@Gradstein2012]). However, at this resolution, two
bins (Middle Jurassic and Late Cretaceous) contained fewer than 10
members, so these data were subsequently incorporated separately into
six bins that combined the Middle--Upper Jurassic and whole-Cretaceous
bins respectively.

### Disparity calculations {#evo:disparity}

Calculations of cladistic disparity used the phylogenetic data matrix
for Ichthyosauriformes and *Hupehsuchus nanchangensis* of
[2](#chapter2){reference-type="ref" reference="chapter2"}. Ordination of
the cladistic data set was calculated in MATRIX, and calculation of
rarefied disparity, partitioned by epoch
([3.3.2](#evo:dates){reference-type="ref" reference="evo:dates"}),
performed in RARE using the standard process of @Wills1998. MATRIX is a
tool to transform discrete characters into a generalised Euclidean
distance matrix, that can then be ordinated using principal coordinates
analysis to summarise the variation onto a smaller number of useful
axes, increasing the variance described by a principal few axes. This
software cannot utilise polymorphic states, which were converted to
uncertainty prior to analysis. Ordination of the generalised Euclidean
dissimilarity matrix was performed in GINKGO ([@DeCaceres2007];
<http://biodiver.bio.ub.es/ginkgo/>). Negative eigenvalues were
corrected using the method of @Caillez1983 -- method 2 of
[@Legendre1999]. RARE calculates total and rarefied disparity from
defined subsets of the ordinated data. Four disparity metrics were
calculated: sum of ranges, sum of variances, product of ranges, and
product of variances; all axes were used in disparity calculations. As
largely incomplete taxa may produce spurious results, taxa with less
than 20% completeness were excluded from disparity calculation, but were
included in the morphospace plots. Rarefaction by number of taxa showed
the mean sum of variances to be the most consistent across varying
number of taxa ([3.3](#fig:rare-MSV){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:rare-MSV"}), so this value was preferred for discussion.
Bootstrapping was conducted to produce 95% confidence intervals by
resampling all coordinate axes and calculating disparity with 1000
replicates. A nonparametric multidimensional analysis of variance (
NPMANOVA) was performed on all taxa to assess the separation of occupied
morphospace between time bins. Two NPMANOVA tests used either the first
five or the first 16 axes of variation: as two time bins were
comparatively depauperate (Middle Jurassic and Late Cretaceous;
*n = 5*), these bins could only be compared to each other with five or
fewer axes; the larger sample was included for comparisons.

The clade Ichthyosauriformes was split into a series of subclades (see
appendix [\[tbl303\]](#tbl303){reference-type="ref" reference="tbl303"})
and partial disparity for each subclade calculated using the MDA package
for Matlab [@Navarro2003]. As ichthyosaur phylogeny presents a series of
nested subclades ([2](#chapter2){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter2"}), many of these divisions are paraphyletic with
respect to more derived large subclades and do not include the disparity
of that subclade -- e.g. Ichthyosauria is nested within
Ichthyosauriformes, but disparity calculations for Ichthyosauriformes do
not include data from Ichthyosauria. Rather than representing separate,
complementary clades, this instead corresponds to a series of evolving
grades across ichthyosauriform evolution [@Motani2005].

### Rates analysis {#evo:methodRates}

The rates of evolution of three continuous characters were analysed
across ichthyosaur phylogeny. Continuous data was collected for as many
taxa as possible (appendix [\[tbl302\]](#tbl302){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl302"}). The rates of change of body size and orbit
length/skull length ratio were analysed as these have been discussed
previously [e.g. @Merriam1908; @Appleby1961; @McGowan1972b].
Incompleteness of taxa allowed this data to be collected for 59 taxa
([2](#chapter2){reference-type="ref" reference="chapter2"}; appendix
[\[tbl307\]](#tbl307){reference-type="ref" reference="tbl307"};
[@Cleary2015]).

Analysis of evolutionary rates used a stable model as implemented by
`stabletraits` [@Elliot2014]. The stable model is a generalised form of
the Brownian motion model of continuous character evolution without
fixed finite variance [@Elliot2014 2--4]. The software `stabletraits`
uses Markov chain Monte Carlo ( MCMC) methods to fit the stable model to
trees and data [@Elliot2014 7]. Trees were time-calibrated in the R
package `paleotree` [@Bapst2012] using the 'equal' branch-scaling method
of @Brusatte2008, based on the first occurrence dates of terminal taxa
([3.3.2](#evo:dates){reference-type="ref" reference="evo:dates"};
appendix [\[tbl301\]](#tbl301){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl301"}). A sample of 1000 trees was taken from the
posterior sample of all analyses in [2](#chapter2){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter2"} (parsimony, likelihood, and Bayesian-inference).
Best trees were selected using the stratigraphical consistency index [
SCI; @Huelsenbeck1994; @Bell2014]. As data is not available for all the
taxa present in the trees, the trees were pruned prior to time-scaling.
The `stabletraits` run used 1 × 10^6^ steps on two Markov chains, with a
burn-in of 20% of this in the summarising of the output; the gamma
distribution prior was left at the default values. The size data was
compared directly using a node height test
[@Freckleton2006; @Slater2014]. The rate data was incorporated in a
novel 'branch length plot' that plots the lengths of branches between
nodes against their branching times; the gradient of the regression line
shows the rate of change in a character.

Results {#evo:results}
-------

![Cladistic morphospace occupation of ichthyosaurs through the Mesozoic.
Taxa are separated into eight time bins: Early Triassic, Middle
Triassic, Late Triassic, Early Jurassic, Middle Jurassic, Late Jurassic,
Early Cretaceous, and Late Cretaceous. Convex hulls mark the minimal
area occupied by taxa that are greater than 20% complete in the dataset.
Plots are based on axes 1 and 2 from the principal coordinates analysis.
[\[fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12\]]{#fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12
label="fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12"}](./img/fig-disparity-xy12.pdf){#fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12
height="0.4\\textheight"}

![Cladistic morphospace occupation of ichthyosaurs through the Mesozoic.
Taxa are separated into eight time bins: Early Triassic, Middle
Triassic, Late Triassic, Early Jurassic, Middle Jurassic, Late Jurassic,
Early Cretaceous, and Late Cretaceous. Convex hulls mark the minimal
area occupied by taxa that are greater than 20% complete in the dataset.
Plots are based on axes 1 and 3 from the principal coordinates analysis.
[\[fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13\]]{#fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13
label="fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13"}](./img/fig-disparity-xy13.pdf){#fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13
height="0.4\\textheight"}

### Morphospace occupation {#evo:resultsmorph}

The results show that ichthyosaur cladistic morphospace shifted through
the Mesozoic
([\[fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13\]](#fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13"}):
morphospace occupation of Jurassic and Cretaceous taxa is different to
that of Triassic taxa. Significant shifts in morphospace occupation of
consecutive time bins were found between the Early--Middle Triassic and
Late Triassic--Early Jurassic (*a* = 5, *a* = 16), and Early--Middle
Jurassic (*a* = 5)
([\[tbl:claddis-NPMANOVA\]](#tbl:claddis-NPMANOVA){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:claddis-NPMANOVA"}). Including only the first five axes
of variation (8.10% of variance) the Middle--Late Triassic transition
does not show a significant shift, neither do any of the transitions
between the Middle Jurassic to Late Cretaceous. When the number of
sampled axes is increased to 16 (20.22% of variance), the pattern
largely remains the same, although several comparisons between the
Middle Jurassic and Late Cretaceous, and other time bins become
non-significant
([\[tbl:claddis-NPMANOVA\]](#tbl:claddis-NPMANOVA){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:claddis-NPMANOVA"}). Axis contribution is sigmoidal in
[6.1](#fig:cladistic-disparity-scree){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:cladistic-disparity-scree"}: the first axes make a
greater contribution to the variance, the last axes contribute less or
none, and the middle majority contribute approximately equally to the
variance. Use of subsets of axes can be useful, however, in this case
adding each of the middle set will have a similar effect on subsequent
calculations: the first 48 axes exhibit over 50% of the variance, while
the first 93 axes are required to show over 90% of the variance
(appendix [\[tbl305\]](#tbl305){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl305"}), justifying the use of all axes in the disparity
calculations. From the cladistic morphospace plots, morphospace
occupation appears greatest in the Middle--Late Triassic: the convex
hulls here cover the largest areas in
[\[fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13\]](#fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13"};
this is tested below
([3.4.2](#evo:resultsdisparity){reference-type="ref"
reference="evo:resultsdisparity"}). Several particularly incomplete taxa
(\<20%) were found to produce spurious results that were outside the
convex hulls drawn in
[\[fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13\]](#fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13"}.

to

\
\
**a = 7** &\
& ET & MT & LT & EJ & MJ & LJ & EK & LK\
ET & & 0.232167619 & **0.0045072 & \* & **0.00077232 & \* & \* &
**0.003922347\
MT & 0.15236 & & **0.043621333 & \* & \* & \* & \* & **0.000203345\
lT & **0.0022536 & **0.024537 & & \* & **0.001398572 & \* & \* &
**0.003922347\
EJ & \* & \* & \* & & 0.259054545 & **0.043621333 & 0.087351579 &
0.202336\
MJ & **0.00028962 & \* & **0.00056817 & 0.1781 & & 0.6973184 &
0.826571852 & 1\
LJ & \* & \* & \* & **0.023506 & 0.54478 & & 0.687426667 & 0.711261538\
EK & \* & \* & 0.051865 & 0.69742 & 0.51557 & & 0.598427826\
LK & **0.0017529 & \* & **0.0018386 & 0.12646 & 0.88998 & 0.5779 &
0.43012\
\
**a = 14** &\
& ET & MT & LT & EJ & MJ & LJ & EK & LK\
ET & & 0.119966786 & 0.189084375 & \* & 0.643267895 & \* & \* &
0.931406087\
MT & 0.0610 & & 0.189084375 & \* & **0.030114818 & \* & \* &
0.119966786\
LT & 0.110 & 0.11205 & & **0.00031998 & 0.370058824 & \* & **0.00012015
& 0.647973\
EJ & \* & \* & **0.00010666 & & 0.643267895 & **0.003159 & 0.05715 &
0.663608571\
MJ & 0.43973 & **0.012269 & 0.233 & 0.45267 & & 0.94 & 0.94 & --\
LJ & \* & \* & \* & **0.00117 & 0.921 & & 0.666826364 & 0.94\
EK & \* & \* & \* & **0.0254 & 0.940 & 0.54334 & & 0.94\
LK & 0.79342 & 0.062205 & 0.47998 & 0.51614 & -- & 0.88877 & 0.88302\
**********************************************

### Morphological disparity {#evo:resultsdisparity}

![Rarefaction curves of ichthyosaur disparity in each of six time bins,
calculated from the principal coordinate output of MATRIX in RARE. The
disparity metric used is mean sum of variances drawn from 1000 bootstrap
replicates using all axes; 95% confidence intervals are marked in grey.
Only taxa more than 20% complete were included. The stability of the
mean value means that this metric is used in the results and discussion.
[\[fig:rare-MSV\]]{#fig:rare-MSV
label="fig:rare-MSV"}](./img/fig-rare-msv.pdf){#fig:rare-MSV
width="\\textwidth"}

![Diversity and cladistic disparity of ichthyosaurs through the
Mesozoic. Data has been binned into six epoch-level bins with
Middle--Late Jurassic and Early--Late Cretaceous epochs combined. Epoch
ranges are marked by grey banding. Rarefied disparity (mean sum of
variances) through time is shown for *n = 10* taxa (**B**) and all taxa
(**C**). C indicates character completeness of taxa. Partial disparity
is calculated for seven clades (see
[\[evo:disparity,tbl303\]](#evo:disparity,tbl303){reference-type="ref"
reference="evo:disparity,tbl303"}).
[\[fig:disparity-time-plots\]]{#fig:disparity-time-plots
label="fig:disparity-time-plots"}](./img/fig-disparity-time.pdf "fig:"){#fig:disparity-time-plots
height="0.8\\textheight"} [\[fig:diversity-time\]]{#fig:diversity-time
label="fig:diversity-time"}
[\[fig:disparity10-time\]]{#fig:disparity10-time
label="fig:disparity10-time"}
[\[fig:disparitytotal-time\]]{#fig:disparitytotal-time
label="fig:disparitytotal-time"}
[\[fig:partialdisparity-time\]]{#fig:partialdisparity-time
label="fig:partialdisparity-time"}

lSSSSSS

\
& ET & MT & LT & EJ & MLJ & K\
ET & & 1 & 0.71776529 & 0.640344963 & 0.838671859 & 0.355636925\
MT & 0.990952096 & & 0.71776529 & 0.640344963 & 0.838671859 &
0.355636925\
LT & 0.232063189 & 0.250571365 & & & 0.71776529 & 0.734889384\
EJ & 0.213448321 & 0.18585981 & 0.993088764 & & 0.71776529 &
0.734889384\
MLJ& 0.696794431 & 0.698893216 & 0.358882645 & 0.328572093 & &
0.355636925\
K & 0.119322185 & 0.15157435 & 0.599528019 & 0.61240782 & 0.177818462 &\

Rarefying the disparity calculated among the four metrics (sums and
products of ranges and variances) found the the mean sum of variances
was the most constant value across varying numbers of taxa, so this
metric was used for the results and discussion
([\[fig:rare-MSR,fig:rare-MSV,fig:rare-MPR,fig:rare-MPV,fig:disparity-time-plots\]](#fig:rare-MSR,fig:rare-MSV,fig:rare-MPR,fig:rare-MPV,fig:disparity-time-plots){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:rare-MSR,fig:rare-MSV,fig:rare-MPR,fig:rare-MPV,fig:disparity-time-plots"}).
Inexplicably, calculation of the mean product of variances in RARE had
some mean values higher than the upper interval of the 95% error
calculation; these results only apply when rarefied for two to five
taxa, so are not considered here.

Through the Mesozoic, ichthyosaur morphological diversity shows general
stability ([3.4](#fig:disparity-time-plots){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:disparity-time-plots"}). There is a sharp increase in
disparity between the Early Triassic and the Middle Triassic, but
subsequently, levels of disparity remain similar, although decreasing
slightly through the rest of the Mesozoic, particularly across the
Triassic--Jurassic boundary, and between the Middle--Late Jurassic and
Cretaceous. The highest levels of disparity are found in the
Middle--Late Triassic; despite having the highest diversity, the Early
Jurassic bin has the lowest disparity after the Early Triassic. The
Middle--Late Jurassic and Cretaceous time bins, however, maintain
similar or slightly higher levels of disparity than the Lower Jurassic.
Pairwise *t*-tests show that no bin has significantly different total
disparity to any other
([\[tbl:claddis-ttest\]](#tbl:claddis-ttest){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:claddis-ttest"}), however, comparisons between the Early
Triassic and the Middle and Late Triassic approach the closest to
significance between them; these have the largest differences in total
levels of disparity
([\[fig:diversity-time,fig:disparity10-time\]](#fig:diversity-time,fig:disparity10-time){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:diversity-time,fig:disparity10-time"}).

Separating contributions of the subclades comprising Ichthyosauriformes
to the total disparity of the clade shows a sequential replacement of
each clade through the time bins
([\[fig:partialdisparity-time\]](#fig:partialdisparity-time){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:partialdisparity-time"}) -- e.g. basal Ichthyosauriformes
are replaced by basal Ichthyosauria, basal Neoichthyosauria are replaced
by Ophthalmosauridae. This follows on from the discussion of ichthyosaur
phylogeny, which shows a similar nested topology
([2](#chapter2){reference-type="ref" reference="chapter2"}). The two
particularly disparate Triassic clades -- Mixosauridae and Shastasauria,
although not the most speciose -- account for a large proportion of the
total disparity in their respective time bins, despite not accounting
for much of the diversity
([\[fig:partialdisparity-time\]](#fig:partialdisparity-time){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:partialdisparity-time"}). The relative disparity effected
by each subclade of Ichthyosauriformes is mostly apparent only for a
single time bin, before it is reduced or removed; this suggests a rapid
replacement of each subclade with more derived forms through ichthyosaur
evolution. Basal Ichthyosauriformes, basal Ichthyosauria, and basal
Euichthyosauria are all present in two time bins, as is the more derived
Neoichthyosauria -- represented particularly by *Malawania anachronus*.

### Time-scaled phylogeny {#evo:resultsPhylogeny}

The time scaled, most stratigraphically correlated trees are shown in
[3.5](#fig:timecalibrated-phylogeny){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:timecalibrated-phylogeny"}. In both, there is rapid
diversification of ichthyosaurs between the Olenekian and Anisian. This
may be effected by the inclusion of several poorly known late Early and
early Middle Triassic taxa that were found to be unstable in phylogeny
reconstruction (see [2](#chapter2){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter2"}) -- e.g. *Cymbospondylus piscosus, Phantomosaurus
neubigi,* and *Quasianosteosaurus vikinghoegdai*. The inclusion of these
taxa in more derived clades may push nodes earlier. Similarly with
*Hudsonelpidia brevirostris* positioned within Parvipelvia, and pushing
the basal nodes of this clade earlier. Conversely, the scarcity of
Norian and Rhaetian ichthyosaurs has spread the basal nodes of
Parvipelvia, Neoichthyosauria, and Thunnosauria, creating long ghost
lineages. Between the Bajocian--Callovian, there is another period of
rapid diversification in the *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* + *Maiaspondylus
lindoei* clade
([3.5](#fig:timecalibrated-phylogeny){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:timecalibrated-phylogeny"}); the *Mollesaurus
periallus* + *Platypterygius australis* clade has much longer branch
lengths through the Middle Jurassic--Cretaceous. Among the
randomly-selected MPTs, there are two main regions of instability:
between Eoichthyosauria and Euichthyosauria, and between Parvipelvia and
Thunnosauria. These are represented by the least well resolved portions
of the consensus tree presented in [2](#chapter2){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter2"}. Major differences between are the relative
positions of *Leptonectes, Temnodontosaurus, Ichthyosaurus,
Hauffiopteryx,* and members of Ophthalmosauridae.

![Two most stratigraphically consistent trees of ichthyosaurs,
time-scaled using the occurrence dates in
[\[tbl301\]](#tbl301){reference-type="ref" reference="tbl301"} by the
equal method of @Brusatte2008. Occurrences are indicated by the
thickened lines. A pruned version of this tree is used in the analyses
of rates of evolution of traits across ichthyosaur evolution.
Abbreviations: **C**, Ichthyosauria; **I**, Ichthyosauriformes; **M**,
Mixosauridae; **N**, Neoichthyosauria; **O**, Ophthalmosauridae; **S**,
Shastasauria; **U**, Euichthyosauria. Node-based clades are indicated at
the nodes; stem-based clades are indicated on the branch (see also
[2.5](#sys:SystematicPalaeontology){reference-type="ref"
reference="sys:SystematicPalaeontology"}).
[\[fig:timecalibrated-phylogeny\]]{#fig:timecalibrated-phylogeny
label="fig:timecalibrated-phylogeny"}](./img/fig-strapTree33.pdf){#fig:timecalibrated-phylogeny
height="0.8\\textheight"}

![
[continued]{.sans-serif}](./img/fig-strapTree603.pdf){height="0.8\\textheight"}

![Node height tests for body size (**A**), orbit ratio (**B**), and
skull length (**C**). Light grey crosses show absolute value of
contrasts; dark grey LOESS smooth lines shown are for each sampled
phylogeny. Red lines show the LOESS smooth lines for the two highest SCI
trees. Absolute value of contrast decreases through the Mesozoic in all
cases. The scaling for the orbit ratio tree is inexplicable.
[\[fig:nodeheight\]]{#fig:nodeheight
label="fig:nodeheight"}](./img/fig-node-height.pdf "fig:"){#fig:nodeheight
height="0.85\\textheight"}
[\[fig:nodeheight-body\]]{#fig:nodeheight-body
label="fig:nodeheight-body"}
[\[fig:nodeheight-orbit\]]{#fig:nodeheight-orbit
label="fig:nodeheight-orbit"}
[\[fig:nodeheight-skull\]]{#fig:nodeheight-skull
label="fig:nodeheight-skull"}

!['Branch length plots' for body size (**A**), orbit ratio (**B**), and
skull length (**C**). Light grey crosses show the rate of evolution
between nodes plotted at the occurrence of the early node; dark grey
LOESS smooth lines shown are for each sampled phylogeny. Red lines show
the LOESS smooth lines for the two highest SCI trees. The gradient of
the LOESS smooth lines shows the instantaneous rate of evolution of that
character. While rates of evolution are high early on, these decrease
through the Triassic and remain more constant and lower in the Jurassic
and Cretaceous. [\[fig:branchlength\]]{#fig:branchlength
label="fig:branchlength"}](./img/fig-node-branch.pdf "fig:"){#fig:branchlength
height="0.85\\textheight"}
[\[fig:branchlength-body\]]{#fig:branchlength-body
label="fig:branchlength-body"}
[\[fig:branchlength-orbit\]]{#fig:branchlength-orbit
label="fig:branchlength-orbit"}
[\[fig:branchlength-skull\]]{#fig:branchlength-skull
label="fig:branchlength-skull"}

### Rates of morphological evolution {#evo:resultsRates}

All of the traits -- body length, skull length, and orbital ratio --
showed a similar pattern of evolutionary rates across ichthyosaur
phylogeny
([\[fig:nodeheight,fig:branchlength\]](#fig:nodeheight,fig:branchlength){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:nodeheight,fig:branchlength"}): a generally low median
rate of change, punctuated by higher rates of changes for certain taxa
and clades. The highest rates of change in both body and skull length
are found in taxa that are sister to a taxon that is a very different
size
([\[fig:bodysize-rate,fig:skullsize-rate\]](#fig:bodysize-rate,fig:skullsize-rate){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:bodysize-rate,fig:skullsize-rate"}) -- e.g. *Shastasaurus
sikkaniensis* at 21 m body length is sister to *Shastasaurus liangae*,
at 6.44 m; *Thalattoarchon saurophagis* is 8.6 m while *Xinminosaurus
catactes* is 2.32 m.

![Rates of change in body length across ichthyosaur evolution plotted
for the two most stratigraphically consistent trees found in
phylogenetic analyses from [2](#chapter2){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter2"}. Branches are scaled and coloured to indicate rate
of change: blue represents lower and red higher rates of evolution. The
highest rates are shown by taxa paired with a much smaller taxon --
e.g.*Shastasaurus sikkaniensis* is 21 m, while *Shastasaurus liangae* is
6.44 m. Abbreviations: **E**, Eoichthyosauria; **M**, Merriamosauria;
**N**, Neoichthyosauria; **O**, Ophthalmosauridae; **T**, Thunnosauria;
**X**, Mixosauridae. Node-based clades are indicated at the nodes;
stem-based clades are indicated on the branch (see also
[2.5](#sys:SystematicPalaeontology){reference-type="ref"
reference="sys:SystematicPalaeontology"}).
[\[fig:bodysize-rate\]]{#fig:bodysize-rate
label="fig:bodysize-rate"}](./img/fig-sci-body-rates.pdf){#fig:bodysize-rate
height="0.8\\textheight"}

#### Body size {#evo:resultsBodyrates}

Major shifts in body size evolution occur towards the base of the
Eoichthyosauria (*Utatsusaurus hataii* + *Ichthyosaurus communis*) and
the branches leading to Merriamosauria
([3.8](#fig:bodysize-rate){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:bodysize-rate"}). The variability of topology in the
latter region means that the magnitude of this shift is uncertain. Two
main topologies are present: Shastasauria that includes only
*Shastasaurus*, and Shastasauria including *Besanosaurus leptorhynchus*
and *Mikadocephalus gracilirostris*
([\[fig:bodyc,fig:bodyi\]](#fig:bodyc,fig:bodyi){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:bodyc,fig:bodyi"}). In the latter cases, there is a high
rate of change on the Shastasauria branch, associated with the
comparatively large size of these taxa. Euichthyosauria has a relatively
lower rate of evolution in body size associated with a deceleration
through the Late Triassic
([\[fig:nodeheight-body,fig:branchlength-body\]](#fig:nodeheight-body,fig:branchlength-body){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:nodeheight-body,fig:branchlength-body"}), however,
another larger shift occurs towards the *Hauffiopteryx
typicus* + Thunnosauria clade
([3.8](#fig:bodysize-rate){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:bodysize-rate"}). This shift is not as certain as that
towards Shastasauria due to the uncertainty of the topology in this
region, but is present in all trees sampled.

#### Skull size {#evo:resultsSkullrates}

Rates of evolution in skull size are more even across the trunk
ichthyosaur phylogeny than for body size
([3.9](#fig:skullsize-rate){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:skullsize-rate"}). Much higher rates are associated
mostly with sets of disparately sized taxa -- e.g. *Shastasaurus
sikkaniensis* and *Shastasaurus liangae*, and *Thalattoarchon
saurophagis* and *Xinminosaurus catactes* again. Unlike with body size,
there is no extremely heightened rate of evolution at the base of
Ichthyosauria, but a small increase is found towards Parvipelvia and
around the base of Neoichthyosauria. Topological changes have a less
noticeable effect on the rates of change across the tree, and through
time these are less variable than for body size
([\[fig:nodeheight-skull,fig:branchlength-skull\]](#fig:nodeheight-skull,fig:branchlength-skull){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:nodeheight-skull,fig:branchlength-skull"}). Notably, the
topology of Neoichthyosauria and Eurhinosauria cause higher rates of
change towards *Leptonectes tenuirostris* and *Leptonectes solei*, which
have particularly elongate skulls, and Thunnosauria
([\[fig:skulla,fig:skullc,fig:skulli\]](#fig:skulla,fig:skullc,fig:skulli){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:skulla,fig:skullc,fig:skulli"}).

![Rates of change in skull length across ichthyosaur evolution plotted
for the two most stratigraphically consistent trees found in
phylogenetic analyses from [2](#chapter2){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter2"}. Branches are scaled and coloured to indicate rate
of change: blue represents lower and red higher rates of evolution.
Abbreviations: **E**, Eoichthyosauria; **M**, Merriamosauria; **N**,
Neoichthyosauria; **O**, Ophthalmosauridae; **T**, Thunnosauria; **X**,
Mixosauridae. Node-based clades are indicated at the nodes; stem-based
clades are indicated on the branch (see also
[2.5](#sys:SystematicPalaeontology){reference-type="ref"
reference="sys:SystematicPalaeontology"}).[\[fig:skullsize-rate\]]{#fig:skullsize-rate
label="fig:skullsize-rate"}](./img/fig-sci-skull-rates.pdf){#fig:skullsize-rate
height="0.8\\textheight"}

#### Orbital ratio {#evo:resultsOrbitalrates}

Similar to the evolution of the length of the skull in ichthyosaurs, the
rates of change in orbital ratio are relatively constant across
ichthyosaur phylogeny
([\[fig:orbitsize-rate,fig:nodeheight-orbit,fig:branchlength-orbit\]](#fig:orbitsize-rate,fig:nodeheight-orbit,fig:branchlength-orbit){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:orbitsize-rate,fig:nodeheight-orbit,fig:branchlength-orbit"}).
Unlike the other analyses, no taxa have radically larger rates of
evolution along their branch. Larger shifts occur towards the base of
the tree and Parvipelvia, and at the *Chacaicosaurus
cayi* + Ophthalmosauridae clade. Most trees exhibit a deceleration of
change in orbital ratio within Parvipelvia (except
[\[fig:orbitb\]](#fig:orbitb){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:orbitb"}), and all trees do within Ophthalmosauridae,
suggesting stability of this feature. Unsurprisingly, taxa known for
having relatively large orbits show higher rates on their branches --
e.g. *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* and *Qianichthyosaurus*.

![Rates of change in McGowan's [-@McGowan1976] orbital ratio across
ichthyosaur evolution plotted for the two most stratigraphically
consistent trees found in phylogenetic analyses from
[2](#chapter2){reference-type="ref" reference="chapter2"}. Branches are
scaled and coloured to indicate rate of change: blue represents lower
and red higher rates of evolution. Abbreviations: **E**,
Eoichthyosauria; **M**, Merriamosauria; **N**, Neoichthyosauria; **O**,
Ophthalmosauridae; **T**, Thunnosauria; **X**, Mixosauridae. Node-based
clades are indicated at the nodes; stem-based clades are indicated on
the branch (see also
[2.5](#sys:SystematicPalaeontology){reference-type="ref"
reference="sys:SystematicPalaeontology"}).[\[fig:orbitsize-rate\]]{#fig:orbitsize-rate
label="fig:orbitsize-rate"}](./img/fig-sci-orbit-rates.pdf){#fig:orbitsize-rate
height="0.8\\textheight"}

Discussion {#evo:discussion}
----------

### Early radiation of ichthyosaurs {#evo:earlyradiation}

Despite the substantial increase in disparity between the Early and
Middle Triassic, this is not found to be significant
([\[fig:disparity-time-plots,tbl:claddis-ttest\]](#fig:disparity-time-plots,tbl:claddis-ttest){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:disparity-time-plots,tbl:claddis-ttest"}). Several
ichthyosaur taxa appear almost simultaneously in the fossil record
towards the end of the Olenekian with a widespread peri-Panthalassan
distribution (appendix [\[tbl301\]](#tbl301){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl301"}; [@Bardet2014; @Motani2014]). The rapid
diversification of both species and morphology in the late Early--early
Middle Triassic has been used to suggest that marine reptiles had a
ghost lineage into the Permian
[@Benson2010; @Bardet1995; @Bardet1994; @Hughes2013]. While there is a
rapid rate of lineage accumulation at the base of the tree, this is
substantially increased just prior to the Anisian
([3.5](#fig:timecalibrated-phylogeny){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:timecalibrated-phylogeny"}). As this latter clade
possibly erroneously includes unstable Early Triassic taxa, this
radiation may be being forced to be earlier and more compressed than it
might otherwise be. However, the diversity, disparity, and ecology of
ichthyosaurs found in the Anisian, and recent evidence for larger
ichthyosaurs in the Spathian--Smithian (Olenekian), supports evidence
for the stabilisation of the marine ecosystem following the end-Permian
Mass extinction [@Frobisch2013; @Maxwell2013a; @Scheyer2014; @Chen2012].
A high rate of diversification after the end-Permian mass extinction is
experienced across Amniota, however, subsequent diversifications have
not necessarily been causally linked, and other major events may not be
followed by such a diversification
([3.5.5](#evo:biases){reference-type="ref" reference="evo:biases"};
[@Brocklehurst2015; @Benson2011; @Benson2010]). The end-Permian mass
extinction and its immediate aftermath opened marine ecological niches
that had previously been occupied by Palaeozoic faunas. While the higher
positions in the food chains were immediately colonised by fishes and
temnospondyls, the opportunity was apparently soon taken by marine
reptiles: the earliest ichthyosaurs show a greater range of ecological
variation than later ichthyosaurs that may have experienced greater
competition from the increasing diversity of marine reptiles
[@Scheyer2014; @Romano2012; @Benson2010]. This competition came from the
evolution in the Early Triassic of novel ecological-functional
morphology -- e.g. lunge feeding in *Hupehsuchus* and suction feeding in
*Cartorhynchus* [@Motani2015a]. The diversity and population of
ichthyosaurs in the Early Triassic appears larger than other marine
reptile clades [@Motani2014; @Motani2014a; @Jiang2016], however, this
may be the result of favourable lagerstätten in e.g. China
[@Stone2010; @Motani2014], Svalbard [@Wiman1933; @Kear2016], and the
western USA [@Kelley2016]. While sauropterygian remains are known from
the Early Triassic, their diversity and disparity (morphological and
functional) did not increase to match those of ichthyosaurs until the
Anisian [@Scheyer2014; @Stubbs2016]; this group -- like ichthyosaurs --
shows early high disparity also [@Stubbs2016; @Hughes2013]. Hupehsuchia
and Thalattosauria, as less speciose clades, show smaller contributions
to the Early Triassic and Middle--Late Triassic respectively
[@Stubbs2016; @Scheyer2014; @Benson2010; @Bardet2014].

### Late Triassic morphological shift

@Bardet1995 suggested that restructuring of marine reptile ecology from
near-shore to pelagically-adapted forms occurred during the Late
Triassic. Similarly, @Dick2015 found that post-Middle Triassic
ichthyosaurs comprised only pelagically-adapted forms; shallow-water and
circalittoral forms were lost. This is associated in the present study
with the leftwards expansion of morphospace occupation in the Late
Triassic bin
([\[fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13\]](#fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13"}).
This shift is found throughout the Late Triassic, apparently culminating
in the evolution of the Parvipelvia and Neoichthyosauria in the Late
Triassic--Early Jurassic
([3.5](#fig:timecalibrated-phylogeny){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:timecalibrated-phylogeny"};
[@Motani1999c; @Frobisch2013]). The notable shift in rates of
morphological change in body size occurs in line with this
([\[fig:bodysize-rate,fig:bodysize-ratetrees\]](#fig:bodysize-rate,fig:bodysize-ratetrees){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:bodysize-rate,fig:bodysize-ratetrees"}), although other
changes in morphology are delayed
([\[fig:skullsize-rate,fig:skullsize-ratetrees,fig:orbitsize-rate,fig:orbitsize-ratetrees\]](#fig:skullsize-rate,fig:skullsize-ratetrees,fig:orbitsize-rate,fig:orbitsize-ratetrees){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:skullsize-rate,fig:skullsize-ratetrees,fig:orbitsize-rate,fig:orbitsize-ratetrees"}).
This is particularly represented by 'shastasaur-grade' ichthyosaurs
[@Motani2005], which diversified into relatively large forms --
e.g. *Shastasaurus sikkaniensis*, up to 21 m -- that are interpreted as
occupying ram-feeding niches, similar to modern cetaceans
[@Sander2011; @Motani2013; @Nicholls2004; @Massare1990]. Large-scale
environmental changes through the Triassic have been proposed as the
cause for the decline in marine reptile diversity in the Late Triassic
[@Kelley2014]. Particularly, rate of sea-level change has been suggested
as the reason for the demise of durophagous marine reptiles following
the Middle Triassic. These major change have correlates with the quality
of the record that the data is taken from [@Benson2011]; untangling
whether these drive each other together, independently, or not at all,
has been discussed at length ([3.5.5](#evo:biases){reference-type="ref"
reference="evo:biases"}).

However, there are shastasaur-grade [@Motani2005] ichthyosaur taxa
present in the Middle Triassic -- i.e. *Besanosaurus leptorhynchus* and
*Phantomosaurus neubigi* -- which suggests this shift towards a pelagic
form may begin earlier than the Late Triassic. The non-significant
difference in centroid position
([\[tbl:claddis-NPMANOVA\]](#tbl:claddis-NPMANOVA){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:claddis-NPMANOVA"}) does not confirm whether this is the
case. As the most disparate, leftwards-positioned Middle Triassic taxa
in
[\[fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13\]](#fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13"}
are the Norian *Callawayia neoscapularis* and the parvipelvians
*Macgowania janiceps* and *Hudsonelpidia brevirostris*, there appears to
be a rapid shift in morphospace occupation between this time and the
Early Jurassic. This occurs alongside the decoupling of skull and body
size
([\[fig:bodysize-rate,fig:bodysize-ratetrees,fig:skullsize-rate,fig:skullsize-ratetrees\]](#fig:bodysize-rate,fig:bodysize-ratetrees,fig:skullsize-rate,fig:skullsize-ratetrees){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:bodysize-rate,fig:bodysize-ratetrees,fig:skullsize-rate,fig:skullsize-ratetrees"}),
associated with the relative shortening of the ichthyosaur body, and the
evolution of a thunniform morphology and pelagic lifestyle
[@Motani2005; @Dick2015; @Motani1999c; @Massare1990]. A finer-grained
analysis of this transitional period (Late Triassic--Early Jurassic)
would allow a more thorough exploration of this hypothesis, however, the
incompleteness of the Norian--Rhaetian ichthyosaur record precludes
further study.

### The Triassic--Jurassic boundary: an evolutionary bottleneck?

Recent studies of morphological and functional disparity in ichthyosaurs
and other reptile groups have found a significant decrease in disparity
across the TJB [e.g. @Thorne2011; @Stubbs2013]. Coupling this with no
overlap in the morphospace occupation of ichthyosaurs, @Thorne2011
proposed the idea of an evolutionary bottleneck at the TJB. In the
present study, there is no significant increase or decrease in disparity
between any two time bins
([\[fig:disparity-time-plots,tbl:claddis-ttest\]](#fig:disparity-time-plots,tbl:claddis-ttest){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:disparity-time-plots,tbl:claddis-ttest"}). Neither is
there a notable decrease in diversity across the TJB, indeed diversity
increases into the Early Jurassic. These results conflict with the
proposal of a bottleneck in ichthyosaur evolution at the TJB
[@Thorne2011]. Several differences between the present analysis and that
of @Thorne2011 may be effecting the difference in the results:

1.  [\[evo:thornelisttaxa\]]{#evo:thornelisttaxa
    label="evo:thornelisttaxa"} [Inclusion of taxa to species
    level]{.sans-serif}Coding taxa at the species level may have a small
    effect on the total disparity for a given bin. The use of an average
    metric -- e.g. mean sum of variances -- requires larger variation to
    cause substantial differences, so that genus- and species-level
    disparity metrics are broadly concordant [e.g. @Villier2004].
    Rarefaction of the data by number of species, as applied here and by
    @Thorne2011, attempts to circumvent issues by standardising sample
    size [@Foote1992; @Wills1994]. However, cumulative effects may
    become substantial, and two particular modifications caused by taxon
    inclusion warrant brief mention:

    1.  While species in a genus will all be similar -- likely more
        similar than to another genus -- there will be some variation
        present in the coding for species, related both to apomorphic
        characters and to the completeness of the material available.
        This slight differences will, in theory, create a grouping of
        these most closely related taxa: @Foote1993 [404] used the
        example of numerous species of mice -- taken as close to the
        centroid of mammalian disparity -- causing a decrease in the
        mean sum of variances. Equally, a grouping farther away from the
        centroid would tend to increase the mean sum of variances.
        Therefore, depending on the relative positions of species within
        a genus relative to the centroid in a particular time bin,
        disparity may be increased or decreased.

    2.  Coding to species level allows characters that would otherwise
        be polymorphic to be separated. The methods used here and by
        @Thorne2011 -- i.e. the software MATRIX and RARE -- cannot be
        used with a dataset containing polymorphic characters; the
        workaround used by @Thorne2011 and here is to replace
        polymorphism with uncertainty (`?`). By including taxa at
        species level, polymorphisms present at genus level may then be
        divided in the coding. In the dataset used, this has not
        eradicated all polymorphisms, but these data add additional
        pairwise comparisons between taxa that can affect disparity
        calculated [@Wills1994].

2.  [\[evo:thornelistcharacters\]]{#evo:thornelistcharacters
    label="evo:thornelistcharacters"} [Addition of
    characters]{.sans-serif}Recent description and redescription of
    ichthyosaur taxa and inclusion in phylogenetic analyses has had a
    focus on post-Triassic taxa: 21 new post-Triassic taxa have been
    named since the year 2000 versus 16 Triassic taxa. In recent years,
    these new taxa have been accompanied by phylogenetic analyses to
    investigate their relations. To this end, the number of characters
    included that represent and differentiate these taxa has been
    increased: 118 (40.8%) of the characters included in the data matrix
    used are taken from studies that have focussed on the Parvipelvia or
    Thunnosauria [i.e.
    @Fischer2012; @Fischer2011c; @Fischer2013a; @Roberts2014; @Maxwell2012b; @Fischer2014; @Fernandez2007].
    This relative bias towards the description of post-Triassic
    ichthyosaur taxa, in taxonomic and phylogenetic contexts, results in
    an increased representation of morphological variation, which would,
    in turn, increase the disparity present in these time bins.

A separate issue in the identification of an evolutionary bottleneck at
the Triassic--Jurassic boundary is the question of scale. Both
@Thorne2011 and the research presented here use epoch-level time bins
that are between 4.97 Ma (Early Triassic) and 79 Ma (Cretaceous) in
length. These broad bins may therefore 'smooth out' the finer-scale
perturbations in diversity metrics that could be present [@Villier2004].
Using time bins of epoch-level size in this study is necessary because
of the available diversity: stage-level -- or multi-stage-level --
calculations of disparity are plausible for much of the Mesozoic where
there are at least two valid species of ichthyosaur present. However, in
this method some bins -- e.g. the Rhaetian -- will be populated by fewer
than two taxa. In this case, being able to include ghost lineages, and
their represented disparity [@Brusatte2011], may provide an alternative
approach to a more complete study.

Additionally, neither @Thorne2011 nor this work include material that
cannot be referred to a valid ichthyosaur taxon, or even -- in the case
of *Cetarthrosaurus walkeri* (see
[5.1.2](#appB:excludedtaxa){reference-type="ref"
reference="appB:excludedtaxa"}) -- to material that can be coded in a
phylogenetic data matrix. This excludes material from throughout the
Mesozoic, and its associated disparity, due to its incompleteness --
e.g. Early Triassic: @Scheyer2014 [@Maxwell2013a]; Late Triassic:
@Karl2014 [@Fischer2014c]; Middle--Late Jurassic: see
[\[chapter1\]](#chapter1){reference-type="ref" reference="chapter1"};
Cretaceous: @Fischer2014a. Of particular interest in these references is
the indeterminate ichthyosaurian remains from the French Rhaetian
[@Fischer2014c]. This includes material referred to Shastasauridae, a
clade that is otherwise not present past the Norian. Indeed, further
remains suggest that shastasaurian ichthyosaurs may have been present in
the Early Jurassic [@Martin2014]. Together, these rather tantalising
remains support the idea that the ichthyosaur faunas of the Late
Triassic remained diverse throughout, with more basal
merriamosaurs/shastasaurs alongside more derived non-neoichthyosaurian
parvipelvian ichthyosaurs. However, while there was a rapid and
substantial turnover across the Triassic--Jurassic boundary, the idea of
a bottleneck is clearly related to the sampling used by @Thorne2011, and
the data may equally describe a prolonged turnover event through the
later Late Triassic.

### Ecological migration and contraction in ichthyosaurs

@Thorne2011 suggested that the contraction and loss of ecotypes may have
contributed to the loss of diversity across the TJB. This was recently
explored by @Dick2015 using a similar approach to that taken here:
ordination of a discrete character matrix. Their results show a
contraction of the 'ecospace' (technically an ecologically-informative
morphospace) occupied by ichthyosaurs through the Mesozoic, although
this does not become substantial until the Middle Jurassic--Cretaceous
time bin [@Dick2015 fig. 2a]. Equally, there is no migration or shifting
of 'ecospace' occupation subsequent to the Early--Middle Triassic bin.
This coincides with the exploration of morphology and rapid
diversification in the Early--Middle Triassic
([\[fig:disparity-time-plots,fig:timecalibrated-phylogeny\]](#fig:disparity-time-plots,fig:timecalibrated-phylogeny){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:disparity-time-plots,fig:timecalibrated-phylogeny"}).

There are issues associated with the method used by @Dick2015

characters are not all exclusive, particularly the tooth guild
characters, which are all of the form 'part of guild or other'

dentition characters contradict: edentulous taxa are coded as both
'teeth absent' and 'teeth homodont'

use of virgin Euclidean distances requires character values to be
proportional, i.e. size 2 treated as is twice that of size 1, which is
not necessarily the case

[\[dick:nmds\]]{#dick:nmds label="dick:nmds"} using non-metric
multidimensional scaling ( NMDS) does not necessarily align the axes
with the maximum variance, or to the variable they describe
[@Huntley2006].

is shown well by @Dick2015 [fig. 2], which incorporates the time bin as
a character: the horizontal and vertical separation of each group is
caused by the time variable considerably overriding both coordinates.

Concerns about this representation of the data aside, Dick & Maxwell's
[-@Dick2015] study suggests that ecological innovation in ichthyosaurs
occurred only in the Early--Middle Triassic. This is at odds with the
morphological data presented here, and in previous studies, showing
significant morphological changes in the Late Triassic onwards
([\[fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13,fig:bodysize-rate\]](#fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13,fig:bodysize-rate){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13,fig:bodysize-rate"};
[@Thorne2011; @Massare1990]). The implications of this are that these
post-Middle Triassic pelagic ichthyosaurs first adapted to this ecology
then subsequently specialised to various niches and morphological
subsets within this [@Kelley2015a; @Kelley2015]. Similarly, other
invasion of the marine realm by other marine reptile clades have shown a
similar 'arrive then thrive then specialise' timeline --
e.g. Thalattosuchia in the Early--Middle Jurassic
[@Stubbs2013; @Young2013; @Young2012; @Young2010] and Sauropterygia in
the Early Jurassic [@Benson2012b; @Stubbs2016] -- that represent an
explorative, delayed ecological radiation. However, the Late
Triassic--Early Jurassic terrestrial ecosystem was more complex:
competition between various archosaur lineages seems to have delayed the
diversification of Dinosauria from the Middle Triassic
[@Brusatte2008; @Brusatte2008a].

### Biases, diversity, and disparity {#evo:biases}

Much recent research has questioned whether the fossil record can be
relied upon entirely. The effects of both preservation and sampling have
been attributed to three models [summarised in @Benton2015]

*bias* caused by physical or human drivers affecting fossil record
sampling

*common cause*, where bias in a third factor is acts upon the fossil
record and sampling proxy

*redundancy* in the fossil record and proxy acting on each other or
reciprocally.

@Benson2010 identified a lack of apparent extinction of marine reptiles
at the end-Triassic that may be a result of sampling bias. However, this
did not consider the turnover in taxa [@Thorne2011], which has shown a
rapid exchange of taxa across the TJB; a pattern matched in the exchange
of disparity among subclades
([3.4](#fig:disparity-time-plots){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:disparity-time-plots"}). @Cleary2015 suggest that the
diversity of ichthyosaurs through time is not biased by the availability
of formations.

Control for systematic biases has revolved around the use of proxies for
statistical correction of raw diversity counts [e.g.
@Benson2010; @Benson2011]. However, the use of phylogeny to ameliorate
diversity counts and augment occurrence data has been added to the
toolbox and shown to provide more accurate estimates even with
inaccurate phylogenies [@Brocklehurst2015a]. Using phylogeny to assess
diversity allows inclusion of taxa (real or hypothetical) that are not
present in the rock record, whether as ghost lineages, Lazarus or Elvis
taxa etc. Incorporating phylogeny into disparity analyses allows for the
calculation of ancestral states and their incorporation into estimates
of diversity [@Lloyd2012; @Butler2012; @Lloyd2016; @Brocklehurst2015a].
Additionally, using rarefaction to even out differences in sample size
provides a more consistent method to compare between groupings, although
this does not necessarily remove the effect of intrinsic bias --
e.g. presence of taxa in the palaeoenvironment and lagerstätten effects
[@Benson2010; @Benson2011; @Dean2016; @Cleary2015] -- from the material
present. With these controls in place, it is likely that the patterns
shown here are real: there is strong similarity between the disparity of
ichthyosaurs through the Mesozoic and those of other coeval clades --
particularly  Sauropterygia [@Stubbs2016; @Benson2014a; @Benson2012b];
Thalattosuchia [@Stubbs2013; @Young2010]. However, particular periods
make be less reliable, primarily because of the paucity of material. The
Rhaetian has produced very few ichthyosaur remains, while being key to
our understanding of the magnitude of the Late Triassic extinction.
Recently, revisiting this material has discovered a hidden diversity in
the Rhaetian of France and the Early Jurassic of the UK
[@Fischer2014c; @Martin2014] that may change our understanding of the
ichthyosaur taxic turnover during this time. Similarly, the Middle
Jurassic has dearth of ichthyosaur specimens due to its largely
shallow-water facies. Material of other marine reptile clades --
Thalattosuchia [@Young2013; @Johnson2015; @Fara2000] from the UK are
particularly well represented during this time -- shows a retention of
diversity and increase in disparity during this time [@Young2010], which
is to be expected for ichthyosaurs considering the population and
variation exhibited both before and after the Middle Jurassic
([\[chapter1,fig:disparity-time-plots\]](#chapter1,fig:disparity-time-plots){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter1,fig:disparity-time-plots"};
[@Maisch2008; @Andrews1910; @Andrews1913]). Here, these problematic
epochs have been incorporated into larger bins, which aims to reduce the
effect of spurious results at the expense of resolution.

### Post-Triassic stasis in ichthyosaur evolution and a Jurassic--Cretaceous turnover

Following the Late Triassic--Early Jurassic shift in morphology and the
evolution of the Parvipelvia, there is a deceleration of rates of change
and a lack innovation. No time bins subsequent to the Triassic show
significant differences between their centroid positions
([\[tbl:claddis-NPMANOVA\]](#tbl:claddis-NPMANOVA){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl:claddis-NPMANOVA"}, *a* = 16). These ichthyosaurs conform
to the typical dolphin- or tuna-like form, which is maintained through
the Jurassic and much of the Cretaceous. Studies on other marine reptile
clades have found similar results for metriorhynchoids [@Young2010], but
not for plesiosaurians [@Benson2014a]. Changes in disparity in
plesiosaurians are caused by the reduction of the pliosaurid and
cryptoclidid subclades across the JCB. Similarly, in metriorhynchoids,
there is an increase in the disparity of the geosaurines, but stability
of the metriorhynchines. While there has been thought to be a major
extinction of ichthyosaur taxa at the end of the Jurassic
[@Bardet1994; @Bardet1995; @Sander2000], recent descriptions of new
remains has shown extensive survival of ophthalmosaurids across the JCB
[@Fischer2012; @Fischer2014], and even more disparate phylogenetic
origins for *Malawania anachronus* [@Fischer2013a]. The results above
confirm these previous revisions to a higher diversity of ichthyosaurs
in the Middle Jurassic--Cretaceous [@McGowan1972; @Fischer2014a].
However, the origins of this appear to be disparate: Middle--Late
Jurassic ichthyosaurs are more closely related to *Ophthalmosaurus*
('Ophthalmosaurinae'; 12 taxa in the Middle--Late Jurassic, five taxa in
the Cretaceous;
[3.5](#fig:timecalibrated-phylogeny){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:timecalibrated-phylogeny"}; appendix
[\[tbl301\]](#tbl301){reference-type="ref" reference="tbl301"}), while
Cretaceous ichthyosaurs are more highly represented by
*Platypterygius*-like taxa ('Platypterygiinae'; six taxa in the
Middle--Late Jurassic, 13 taxa in the Cretaceous;
[3.5](#fig:timecalibrated-phylogeny){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:timecalibrated-phylogeny"}; appendix
[\[tbl301\]](#tbl301){reference-type="ref" reference="tbl301"}). This
difference in taxonomic composition suggests that there was higher
turnover in ichthyosaurs at the JCB than previously thought, but that
morphology was conserved and rates of change were low
([\[fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13,fig:bodysize-rate,fig:bodysize-ratetrees,fig:skullsize-rate,fig:skullsize-ratetrees,fig:orbitsize-rate,fig:orbitsize-ratetrees\]](#fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13,fig:bodysize-rate,fig:bodysize-ratetrees,fig:skullsize-rate,fig:skullsize-ratetrees,fig:orbitsize-rate,fig:orbitsize-ratetrees){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:cladistic-disparity-xy12,fig:cladistic-disparity-xy13,fig:bodysize-rate,fig:bodysize-ratetrees,fig:skullsize-rate,fig:skullsize-ratetrees,fig:orbitsize-rate,fig:orbitsize-ratetrees"}),
potentially hiding this signal
[@Fischer2012; @Fischer2014a; @Fischer2014; @Benson2014a]. On the other
hand, ghost lineages of 'platypterygiine' ichthyosaurs may provide a
substantial increase to the the diversity and disparity of the
Middle--Late Jurassic: inclusion of this data may lead to revision of
this hypothesis [@Brusatte2011].

Conclusions {#evo:conclusions}
-----------

1.  A new morphological data set of ichthyosaur morphology containing
    107 ichthyosauriforme taxa scored for 289 characters is analysed for
    cladistic disparity through the Mesozoic. Ichthyosaurs show a
    directional trend in morphology from the more basal forms towards
    the more derived forms, but a major shift in morphospace occupation
    occurs only between the Late Triassic--Jurassic. Middle
    Jurassic--Cretaceous morphology was conserved throughout.

2.  Levels of disparity rapidly increased in the Early Triassic with the
    exploration of new ecologies. However, there is no significant
    change in levels of disparity between consecutive time bins across
    the Mesozoic. This contradicts the proposal of a evolutionary
    bottleneck by @Thorne2011, and the loss of ecological variation
    suggested by @Dick2015. Disparity does not always track diversity,
    suggesting times of relative morphological conservatism (i.e. the
    Early Jurassic). Ichthyosaur clades replaced each other through
    time: the initial increase in diversity is associated with the
    presence of several clades, but is subsequently encompassed largely
    by the speciose single clade Ophthalmosauridae.

3.  Time-scaling of ichthyosaur phylogeny produces a rapid
    diversification of ichthyosaurs from the Early Triassic into the
    Anisian, which coincides with ecological diversification, the
    stabilisation of ecosystems following the end-Permian mass
    extinction, and the emergence of modern trophic networks
    [@Scheyer2014; @Chen2012; @Frobisch2013]. Lineage accumulation in
    the Late Triassic onwards is slower, excepting a more rapid
    'Ophthalmosaurinae' radiation in the Middle Jurassic.

4.  Rates of body size change show a distinct deceleration in the clade
    Merriamosauria, but this is decoupled from rates of skull size and
    orbital ratio change in the Late Triassic--Cretaceous. This is
    associated with the shift in morphospace occupation and the
    evolution of the more derived and pelagically-adapted Parvipelvia.
    Using discrete character analysis on the dataset used here, or
    incorporating further continuous characters may provide a more
    complete picture of ichthyosaur evolution, however, this can be
    hampered by the variation in completeness of taxa and the data that
    can therefore be collected [@Cleary2015].

5.  Morphological turnover events at the TJB and JCB are suggested by
    occurrence data from newly evolved clades (Neoichthyosauria and
    'Platypterygiinae'). The JCB cannot be identified in either
    disparity or morphospace occupation presented here, but may be found
    in a higher resolution (age level) analysis, or by considering
    detailed ecology of taxa. However, inclusion of ghost lineage data
    into both diversity and disparity calculations may smear these
    shifts unless provided adequate models of clade origination.

Conclusions {#conclusions .unnumbered}
===========

The research and results presented here cover various aspects of
ichthyosaur palaeontology, from the smaller scale revision of taxa from
a local time and place ([\[chapter1\]](#chapter1){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter1"}), to the larger scale exploration of ichthyosaur
relations ([2](#chapter2){reference-type="ref" reference="chapter2"})
and macroevolution ([3](#chapter3){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter3"}). Taking this into account, and the initial aims
of the project, the following conclusions can be made:

1.  There are at least four ichthyosaur taxa represented in the British
    Middle--Upper Jurassic
    ([\[chapter1\]](#chapter1){reference-type="ref"
    reference="chapter1"}): *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley,
    -@Seeley1874], *Brachypterygius extremus* [Boulenger,
    -@Boulenger1904], *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* [Hulke, -@Hulke1871],
    and a newly identified Ophthalmosauridae indet. that has affinities
    to specimens previously referred to *Ichthyosaurus trigonus* [Owen,
    -@Owen1840b]. Additionally, remains of *Dearcmhara shawcrossi*
    [Brusatte *et al.*, -@Brusatte2015] from the Toarcian--Aalenian of
    the Isle of Skye, ophthalmosaurid remains from the Bathonian of
    Yetmister [@Delair1985], and the Kimmeridgian--Tithonian collections
    of Mr Steve Etches in Dorset suggest that this diversity may be an
    underestimate. Together, these remains represent the most complete
    and well sampled set of Middle--Upper Jurassic ichthyosaurs
    globally, providing a window on the link between the Toarcian
    ichthyosaurs of south-western Germany [e.g.
    @McGowan1979; @Maisch2008b], the Tithonian ichthyosaurs of Russia
    and Svalbard [e.g. @Arkhangelsky2014; @Druckenmiller2012a], and
    worldwide Cretaceous ichthyosaurs [e.g.
    @Fischer2013a; @Fischer2014; @Fischer2014a].

2.  Ichthyosaurs constitute a monophyletic clade comprising a series of
    nested ingroups that can be diagnosed by the stepwise addition of
    characters across their phylogeny
    ([2](#chapter2){reference-type="ref" reference="chapter2"};
    [@Motani2005; @Motani1999c; @Maisch2000c; @Sander2000]). The wildly
    varying completeness of ichthyosaur taxa can be problematic for
    phylogeny reconstruction, but these taxa are few, and once
    identified and removed, a largely resolved phylogeny can be achieved
    that lends itself to macroevolutionary studies. Further uncertainty
    in the interrelationships of ichthyosaurs caused by lack of
    resolution suggest that phylogenetic signal is not strong enough to
    resolve certain regions, particularly those associated with rapid
    cladogenesis ([3](#chapter3){reference-type="ref"
    reference="chapter3"}; [@Fischer2013a]). Supports calculated for
    most clades in the trees presented are weak, except where
    monogeneric taxa share numerous coded characters. It is suggested
    that additional characters and a fully critical review of the
    present characters are needed to strengthen the recovery of
    phylogenetic signal.

3.  Across ichthyosaur evolution, the rate of change in morphology was
    generally stable, but this was punctuated by times of rapid
    diversification or modification in morphology
    ([3](#chapter3){reference-type="ref" reference="chapter3"}). The
    Early--Middle Triassic featured a swift accumulation of lineages and
    increase in disparity following the end-Permian mass extinction that
    may have been associated with the expansion of ecospace occupied by
    ichthyosaurs [@Benton2013; @Scheyer2014; @Frobisch2013; @Dick2015].
    Additionally, a shift in morphospace occupation through the Late
    Triassic into the Early Jurassic, accompanied by an increase in the
    rate of change of body size and the replacement of more basal
    merriamosaurs with the morphologically distinct Neoichthyosauria
    suggests a major turnover throughout this period, rather than a
    sudden extinction at the end of the Triassic
    [@Thorne2011; @Benson2011; @Benson2010].

Future prospects {#future-prospects .unnumbered}
----------------

[\[futureprospects\]]{#futureprospects label="futureprospects"}

The research presented here highlights that there are aspects of
ichthyosaur palaeontology that have yet to be elucidated despite the
long history of study of the group. Gaps in the fossil record of
ichthyosaurs -- e.g. the later Triassic and Middle Jurassic -- hinder
immediate access to major turnovers or shifts in ichthyosaur evolution,
but the near-constant stream of new material presents further
opportunities to increase knowledge on this subject. Below I have picked
out two particular questions that have been longstanding within the
ichthyosaur literature, but that can be approached with modern methods
and the background of recent studies and materials.

-   @Frobisch2013 suggested that the Middle Triassic macropedatory
    ichthyosaur *Thalattoarchon saurophagis* provides early evidence for
    the establishment of modern, vertebrate-dominated ecosystems.
    Additional fossils from the Early Triassic hint that there may be a
    greater diversity of ichthyosaurs present during this epoch
    [@Scheyer2014]. The incidence of these remains following the
    end-Permian mass extinctions indicates that recovery was rapid
    [@Scheyer2014; @Benton2013]. However, support for such assertions
    requires broader investigation of the entire food web, as far as
    possible: did the radiation after the end-Permian mass extinction
    represent an initial colonisation of a broad ecospace? or did this
    occur by stepwise exploitation of niches?

-   Previous authors have referred to the similarity of ichthyosaurs to
    other marine clades -- most notably sharks and dolphins
    [@Motani1996; @Motani2005]. Numerical methods, such as those
    presented in [3](#chapter3){reference-type="ref"
    reference="chapter3"} provide the tools to quantify such
    similarities of shape using discrete or continuous characters, or
    landmarking in two or three dimensions. Placed within a phylogenetic
    context, such data would allow the assessment of morphological
    convergence between ichthyosaurs and other marine groups, extinct
    and extant, in a manner that could easily be extended to a
    functional study: do ichthyosaurs show immediate or continuous
    convergence with other marine taxa? do changes in ichthyosaur
    morphology result from increasingly efficient adaptation to an
    aquatic existence?

 

PLATES

 

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & left maxilla (GLAHM V1921) in lateral view\
2 & left maxilla (GLAHM V1921) in medial view\
3 & left maxilla (GLAHM V1921) in ventral view (anterior is to the
left)\
4 & left nasal, lachrymal & prefrontal (NHMUK PV R4753) in lateral view\
5 & left nasal, lachrymal & prefrontal (NHMUK PV R4753) in medial view\

![image](./img/Pl1-Ophthalmosaurus-snout.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & left prefrontal (GLAHM V1129) in dorsal view\
2 & left prefrontal (GLAHM V1129) in ventral view\
3 & left postfrontal (NHMUK PV R3534) in dorsal view\
4 & left postfrontal (NHMUK PV R3534) in ventral view\
5 & left supratemporal (NHMUK PV R2146) in lateral view\
6 & left supratemporal (NHMUK PV R2146) in posterior view\
7 & left supratemporal (NHMUK PV R2146) in medial view\
8 & left supratemporal (NHMUK PV R2146) in dorsal view\

![image](./img/Pl2-Ophthalmosaurus-skull-roof.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & left parietal (LEICT 100'1949/198) in dorsal view\
2 & right parietal (LEICT 100'1949/198) in dorsal view\
3 & left parietal (LEICT 100'1949/198) in ventral view\
4 & right parietal (LEICT 100'1949/198) in ventral view\

![image](./img/Pl3-Ophthalmosaurus-parietal.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & right squamosal (GLAHM V1921) in lateral view\
2 & right squamosal (GLAHM V1921) in medial view\
3 & left postorbital (NHMUK PV R3893) in lateral view\
4 & left postorbital (NHMUK PV R3893) in medial view\
5 & left jugal (NHMUK PV R8653) in lateral view\
6 & left jugal (NHMUK PV R8653) in medial view\

![image](./img/Pl4-Ophthalmosaurus-circumorbital.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & right vomer (NHMUK PV R4753) in lateral view\
2 & right vomer (NHMUK PV R4753) in medial view\
3 & right vomer (NHMUK PV R4753) in dorsal view\
4 & right vomer (NHMUK PV R4753) in ventral view\
5 & left palatine (NHMUK PV R4753) in dorsal view\
6 & left palatine (NHMUK PV R4753) in ventral view\

![image](./img/Pl5-Ophthalmosaurus-palate.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & left pterygoid (GLAHM V1921) in dorsal view\
2 & left pterygoid (GLAHM V1921) in ventral view\
3 & left quadrate with supratemporal portion (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133)
in medial view\
4 & left quadrate with supratemporal portion (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133)
in lateral view\
5 & left quadrate with supratemporal portion (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133)
in posterior view\

![image](./img/Pl6-Ophthalmosaurus-back-palate.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & parabasisphenoid (part) ( NHMUK PV R10023 = former Liverpool Museum
4524) in anterior view\
2 & parabasisphenoid (part) ( NHMUK PV R10023 = former Liverpool Museum
4524) in posterior view\
3 & parabasisphenoid (part) ( NHMUK PV R10023 = former Liverpool Museum
4524) in dorsal view\
4 & parabasisphenoid (part) ( NHMUK PV R10023 = former Liverpool Museum
4524) in ventral view\
5 & parabasisphenoid (part) ( NHMUK PV R10023 = former Liverpool Museum
4524) in right lateral view\
6 & parabasisphenoid (part) ( NHMUK PV R10023 = former Liverpool Museum
4524) in left lateral view\

![image](./img/Pl7-Ophthalmosaurus-basisphenoid.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & left prootic (LEICT 100'1949/45) in external (anterior) view\
2 & left prootic (LEICT 100'1949/45) in internal (posterior) view\
3 & left opisthotic (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133) in anteromedial view\
4 & left opisthotic (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133) in posterior view\
5 & left opisthotic (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133) in ventral view\
6 & left opisthotic (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133) in dorsal view\
7 & left opisthotic (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133) in medial view\
8 & left opisthotic (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133) in lateral view\

![image](./img/Pl8-Ophthalmosaurus-occipital.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & supraoccipital (LEICT 100'1949/43) in anterior view\
2 & supraoccipital (LEICT 100'1949/43) in posterior view\
3 & supraoccipital (LEICT 100'1949/43) in ventral view\
4 & supraoccipital (LEICT 100'1949/43) in dorsal view\
5 & supraoccipital (LEICT 100'1949/43) in right lateral view\
6 & left exoccipital (LEICT 100'1949/64) in medial view\
7 & right exoccipital (LEICT 100'1949/64) in medial view\
8 & left exoccipital (LEICT 100'1949/64) in anterior view\
9 & right exoccipital (LEICT 100'1949/64) in anterior view\
10 & left exoccipital (LEICT 100'1949/64) in posterior view\
11 & right exoccipital (LEICT 100'1949/64) in posterior view\

![image](./img/Pl9-Ophthalmosaurus-occipital.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & basioccipital (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133) in anterior view\
2 & basioccipital (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133) in posterior view\
3 & basioccipital (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133) in dorsal view\
4 & basioccipital (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133) in ventral view\
5 & basioccipital (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133) in right lateral view\
6 & basioccipital (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133) in left lateral view\

![image](./img/Pl10-Ophthalmosaurus-holotype-basioccipital.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & left stapes (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133) in anterior view\
2 & left stapes (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133) in posterior view\
3 & left stapes (LEICT 100'1949/45) in anterior view\
4 & left stapes (LEICT 100'1949/45) in posterior view\
5 & left stapes (LEICT 100'1949/45) in right ventral view\
6 & left stapes (LEICT 100'1949/45) in left dorsal view\

![image](./img/Pl11-Ophthalmosaurus-stapes.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & left splenial ( GLAHM V1921, restored) in lateral view\
2 & left splenial ( GLAHM V1921, restored) in medial view\
3 & right surangular ( LEICT 100'1949/202, broken anteriorly) in lateral
view\
4 & right surangular ( LEICT 100'1949/202, broken anteriorly) in medial
view\

![image](./img/Pl12-Ophthalmosaurus-jaw.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & right angular ( LEICT 100'1949/202, portion) in lateral view\
2 & right angular ( LEICT 100'1949/202, portion) in medial view\
3 & left prearticular ( GLAHM V1921, reconstructed) in lateral view\
4 & left prearticular ( GLAHM V1921, reconstructed) in medial view\

![image](./img/Pl13-Ophthalmosaurus-jaw.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & articulated partial right angular and surangular (NHMUK PV R2180) in
lateral view\
2 & articulated partial right angular and surangular (NHMUK PV R2180) in
medial view\
3 & articulated left mandible (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133, posterior
portion) in lateral view\
4 & articulated left mandible (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133, posterior
portion) in medial view\
5 & articulated left mandible ( NHMUK PV R2180, posterior portion) in
lateral view\
6 & articulated left mandible ( NHMUK PV R2180, posterior portion) in
medial view\

![image](./img/Pl14-Ophthalmosaurus-artic-jaws.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & atlas-axis (LEICT 100'1949/75) in anterior view\
2 & atlas-axis (LEICT 100'1949/75) in posterior view\
3 & atlas-axis (LEICT 100'1949/75) in dorsal view\
4 & atlas-axis (LEICT 100'1949/75) in ventral view\
5 & atlas-axis (LEICT 100'1949/75) in left lateral view\
6 & atlas-axis (LEICT 100'1949/75) in right lateral view\

![image](./img/Pl15-Ophthalmosaurus-atlas-axis.png)

rp11cm\
\
& Vertebral centra LEICT 100'1949/75.\
Fig. &\
1 & anterior cervical region (*c.* centrum 3) in anterior view\
2 & anterior cervical region (*c.* centrum 3) in dorsal view\
3 & anterior cervical region (*c.* centrum 3) in left lateral view\
4 & middle cervical region (*c.* centrum 12) in anterior view\
5 & middle cervical region (*c.* centrum 12) in dorsal view\
6 & middle cervical region (*c.* centrum 12) in left lateral view\
7 & posterior cervical region (*c.* centrum 25) in anterior view\
8 & posterior cervical region (*c.* centrum 25) in dorsal view\
9 & posterior cervical region (*c.* centrum 25) in left lateral view\

![image](./img/Pl16-Ophthalmosaurus-vertebrae.png)

rp11cm\
\
& Vertebral centra LEICT 100'1949/75.\
Fig. &\
1 & anterior dorsal region (*c.* centrum 26) in anterior view\
2 & anterior dorsal region (*c.* centrum 26) in dorsal view\
3 & anterior dorsal region (*c.* centrum 26) in left lateral view\
4 & middle dorsal region (*c.* vertebra 35) in anterior view\
5 & middle dorsal region (*c.* vertebra 35) in dorsal view\
6 & middle dorsal region (*c.* vertebra 35) in left lateral view\
7 & posterior dorsal region (*c.* vertebra 41) in anterior view\
8 & posterior dorsal region (*c.* vertebra 41) in dorsal view\
9 & posterior dorsal region (*c.* vertebra 41) in left lateral view\

![image](./img/Pl17-Ophthalmosaurus-vertebrae.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & anterior caudal vertebral centrum ( LEICT 100'1949/75, *c.* vertebra
42) in anterior view\
2 & anterior caudal vertebral centrum ( LEICT 100'1949/75, *c.* vertebra
42) in dorsal view\
3 & anterior caudal vertebral centrum ( LEICT 100'1949/75, *c.* vertebra
42) in left lateral view\
4 & anterior cervical neural spines ( GLAHM V1885, vertebrae 1--5) in
left lateral view\
5 & anterior cervical neural spines ( GLAHM V1885, vertebrae 1--5) in
right lateral view\
6 & vertebra nine (NHMUK PV R8737) in anterior view\
7 & vertebra nine (NHMUK PV R8737) in posterior view\
8 & vertebra nine (NHMUK PV R8737) in left lateral view\
9 & middle tail fluke vertebral centrum (GLAHM V1883) in anterior view\
10 & middle tail fluke vertebral centrum (GLAHM V1883) in dorsal view\
11 & middle tail fluke vertebral centrum (GLAHM V1883) in left lateral
view\
12 & anterior presacral vertebral centrum (GLAHM V1185) in left sagittal
cross-sectional view (anterior to the left)\

![image](./img/Pl18-Ophthalmosaurus-vertebrae.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & articulated clavicles & interclavicle portions (holotype: NHMUK PV
R2133) in anterior view\
2 & articulated clavicles & interclavicle portions (holotype: NHMUK PV
R2133) in posterior view\
3 & left clavicle (NHMUK PV R4753) in anterior view\
4 & left clavicle (NHMUK PV R4753) in posterior view\

![image](./img/Pl19-Ophthalmosaurus-clavicle.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & interclavicle (NHMUK PV R4753) in anterior view\
2 & interclavicle (NHMUK PV R4753) in posterior view\
3 & left scapula & clavicle (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133) in lateral view\
4 & left scapula & clavicle (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133) in medial view\
5 & left coracoid (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133) in dorsal view\
6 & left coracoid (holotype: NHMUK PV R2133) in ventral view\

![image](./img/Pl20-Ophthalmosaurus-pectoral.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & right coracoid (NHMUK PV R2149) in dorsal view\
2 & right coracoid (NHMUK PV R2149) in ventral view\
3 & right coracoid (NHMUK PV R2148) in dorsal view\
4 & right coracoid (NHMUK PV R2148) in ventral view\
5 & left scapula (NHMUK PV R2139) in lateral view\
6 & left scapula (NHMUK PV R2139) in medial view\
7 & left scapula (NHMUK PV R2140) in lateral view\
8 & left scapula (NHMUK PV R2140) in medial view\

![image](./img/Pl21-Ophthalmosaurus-pectoral.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & left forelimb (paratype: NHMUK PV R2134) in dorsal view (anterior is
to the bottom)\
2 & right forelimb (NHMUK PV R2853) in ventral view\
3 & left forelimb (NHMUK PV R2853) in ventral view\

![image](./img/Pl22-Ophthalmosaurus-limbs.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & left humerus (paratype: NHMUK PV R2134) in dorsal view\
2 & left humerus (paratype: NHMUK PV R2134) in ventral view\
3 & left humerus (paratype: NHMUK PV R2134) in anterior view\
4 & left humerus (paratype: NHMUK PV R2134) in posterior view\
5 & left humerus (paratype: NHMUK PV R2134) in proximal view\
6 & left humerus (paratype: NHMUK PV R2134) in distal view\

![image](./img/Pl23-Ophthalmosaurus-holotype-humerus.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & right ilium (GLAHM V1912) in lateral view\
2 & right ilium (GLAHM V1912) in medial view\
3 & right ischiopubis (NHMUK PV R8737) in lateral view\
4 & right ischiopubis (NHMUK PV R8737) in medial view\
5 & right ischiopubis (NHMUK PV R8653) in lateral view\
6 & right ischiopubis (NHMUK PV R8653) in medial view\
7 & left ischiopubis (NHMUK PV R8653) in lateral view\
8 & left ischiopubis (NHMUK PV R8653) in medial view\

![image](./img/Pl24-Ophthalmosaurus-pelvis.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & right femur (NHMUK PV R10031) in dorsal view\
2 & right femur (NHMUK PV R10031) in ventral view\
3 & right femur (NHMUK PV R10031) in anterior view\
4 & right femur (NHMUK PV R10031) in posterior view\
5 & right femur (NHMUK PV R10031) in proximal view\
6 & left hindlimb (NHMUK PV R4695) in ventral view\

![image](./img/Pl25-Ophthalmosaurus-femur.png)

rp11cm\
\
\
Fig. &\
1 & right premaxilla (CAMSM Ib3) in lateral view\
2 & right premaxilla (CAMSM Ib3) in medial view\
3 & right nasal (CAMSM Ib5) in dorsal view\
4 & right nasal (CAMSM Ib5) in lateral view\
5 & right nasal (CAMSM Ib5) in ventral view\
6 & right nasal (CAMSM Ib5) in medial view\
7 & right lachrymal (CAMSM Ib6) in lateral view\
8 & right lachrymal (CAMSM Ib6) in medial view\
9 & left narial region (CAMSM Ib2) in dorsolateral view\
10 & left narial region (CAMSM Ib2) in ventromedial view\

![image](./img/Pl36-I_megalodeirus-skull.png)

rp11cm\
\
\
Fig. &\
1 & right dentary (CAMSM Ia2) in lateral view\
2 & right dentary (CAMSM Ia2) in medial view\
3 & left splenial (CAMSM Ia6) in lateral view\
4 & left splenial (CAMSM Ia6) in medial view\
5 & left surangular (CAMSM Ia4) in lateral view\
6 & left surangular (CAMSM Ia4) in medial view\

![image](./img/Pl37-I_megalodeirus-jaw.png)

rp11cm\
\
\
Fig. &\
1 & right clavicle (CAMSM IIa19) in anterior view\
2 & right clavicle (CAMSM IIa19) in posterior view\
3 & left scapula (CAMSM IIa3) in lateral view\
4 & left scapula (CAMSM IIa3) in medial view\
5 & left coracoid (CAMSM IIa1) in dorsal view\
6 & left coracoid (CAMSM IIa1) in ventral view\
7 & left humerus (CAMSM IIa5) in dorsal view\
8 & left humerus (CAMSM IIa5) in ventral view\
9 & right femur (CAMSM IIa22) in dorsal view\
10 & right femur (CAMSM IIa22) in ventral view\
11 & left femur (CAMSM IIa23) in dorsal view\
12 & left femur (CAMSM IIa23) in ventral view\

![image](./img/Pl38-I_megalodeirus-pectoral.png)

rp11cm\
\
\
Fig. &\
1 & skull roof (PETMG R220) in dorsal view (anterior is to the left)\
2 & skull roof (PETMG R220) in ventral view (anterior is to the left)\
3 & basicranium (PETMG R220) in posterior view\

![image](./img/Pl39-O_monocharactus-skull.png)

rp11cm\
\
\
Fig. &\
1 & right scapula (PETMG R220) in lateral view\
2 & right scapula (PETMG R220) in medial view\
3 & right coracoid (PETMG R220) in dorsal view\
4 & right coracoid (PETMG R220) in ventral view\
5 & right humerus (PETMG R220) in dorsal view\
6 & right humerus (PETMG R220) in ventral view\

![image](./img/Pl40-O_monocharactus-pectoral.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & left parietal ( CAMSM X39251bj) in dorsal view\
2 & left parietal ( CAMSM X39251bj) in ventral view\
3 & left postfrontal ( CAMSM X39251ai) in dorsal view\
4 & left postfrontal ( CAMSM X39251ai) in ventral view\
5 & left supratemporal ( CAMSM X39251bt) in dorsal view\
6 & left supratemporal ( CAMSM X39251bt) in ventral view\
7 & left quadratojugal ( CAMSM X39251) in lateral view\
8 & left quadratojugal ( CAMSM X39251) in medial view\

![image](./img/Pl26-Brachypterygius-skull.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & right vomer ( CAMSM X39251) in lateral view\
2 & right vomer ( CAMSM X39251) in medial view\
3 & right pterygoid and stapes ( CAMSM X39251bh) in dorsal view
(anterior is to the top)\
4 & right pterygoid and stapes ( CAMSM X39251bh) in ventral view
(anterior is to the top)\
5 & right quadrate (CAMSM X39251) in posterior view\
6 & right quadrate (CAMSM X39251) in lateral view\
7 & right quadrate (CAMSM X39251) in medial view\
8 & sclerotic plate ( CAMSM X39251bn) in external view\
9 & sclerotic plate ( CAMSM X39251bn) in internal view\
10 & two articulated sclerotic plates ( CAMSM X39251bo) in external(?)
view\
11 & two articulated sclerotic plates ( CAMSM X39251bo) in internal(?)
view\

![image](./img/Pl27-Brachypterygius-skull.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & basisphenoid (CAMSM TN571.11 = J68516) in anterior view\
2 & basisphenoid (CAMSM TN571.11 = J68516) in posterior view\
3 & basisphenoid (CAMSM TN571.11 = J68516) in dorsal view\
4 & basisphenoid (CAMSM TN571.11 = J68516) in ventral view\
5 & basioccipital (CAMSM TN571.11 = J68516) in anterior view\
6 & basioccipital (CAMSM TN571.11 = J68516) in posterior view\
7 & basioccipital (CAMSM TN571.11 = J68516) in ventral view\
8 & basioccipital (CAMSM TN571.11 = J68516) in dorsal view\

![image](./img/Pl28-Brachypterygius-basiscranii.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & basisphenoid ( CAMSM X39251ae) in anterior view\
2 & basisphenoid ( CAMSM X39251ae) in posterior view\
3 & basisphenoid ( CAMSM X39251ae) in dorsal view\
4 & basisphenoid ( CAMSM X39251ae) in ventral view\
5 & right(?) prootic ( CAMSMce) in anterior view\
6 & right(?) prootic ( CAMSMce) in posterior view\
7 & right opisthotic ( CAMSM X39251as) in anterior view\
8 & right opisthotic ( CAMSM X39251as) in posterior view\
9 & right opisthotic ( CAMSM X39251as) in dorsal view\
10 & right opisthotic ( CAMSM X39251as) in ventral view\
11 & right opisthotic ( CAMSM X39251as) in lateral view\
12 & right opisthotic ( CAMSM X39251as) in medial view\

![image](./img/Pl29-Brachypterygius-occipital.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & supraoccipital ( CAMSM X39251bt) in anterior view\
2 & supraoccipital ( CAMSM X39251bt) in posterior view\
3 & supraoccipital ( CAMSM X39251bt) in dorsal view\
4 & supraoccipital ( CAMSM X39251bt) in ventral view\
5 & left angular ( CAMSM X39251) in lateral view (anterior is to the
top)\
6 & left angular ( CAMSM X39251) in medial view (anterior is to the
top)\
7 & right articular ( CAMSM X39251ar) in medial view\
8 & right articular ( CAMSM X39251ar) in lateral view\

![image](./img/Pl30-Brachypterygius-skull.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & left surangular ( CAMSM X39251aa, anterior portion) in lateral view\
2 & left surangular ( CAMSM X39251aa, anterior portion) in medial view\
3 & left surangular ( CAMSM X39251y, posterior portion) in lateral view\
4 & left surangular ( CAMSM X39251y, posterior portion) in medial view\
5 & right surangular ( CAMSM X39251ak, anterior portion) in lateral
view\
6 & right surangular ( CAMSM X39251ak, anterior portion) in medial view\
7 & right surangular ( CAMSM X39251cf, posterior portion) in lateral
view\
8 & right surangular ( CAMSM X39251cf, posterior portion) in medial
view\
9 & left prearticular ( CAMSM X39251cb, portion) in lateral view\
10 & left prearticular ( CAMSM X39251cb, portion) in medial view\

![image](./img/Pl31-Brachypterygius-jaw.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & tooth ( CAMSM X39251c) in labial view\
2 & tooth ( CAMSM X39251c) in lingual view\
3 & tooth ( CAMSM X39251c) in mesial or distal view\
4 & tooth ( CAMSM X39251h) in labial view\
5 & tooth ( CAMSM X39251h) in lingual view\
6 & tooth ( CAMSM X39251h) in mesial or distal view\
7 & tooth ( CAMSM X39251p) in labial view\
8 & tooth ( CAMSM X39251p) in lingual view\
9 & tooth ( CAMSM X39251p) in mesial or distal view\
10 & right clavicle ( CAMSM X39251ag) in anterior view\
11 & right clavicle ( CAMSM X39251ag) in posterior view\
12 & left clavicle ( CAMSM X39251aj) in anterior view\
13 & left clavicle ( CAMSM X39251aj) in posterior view\
14 & left scapula ( CAMSM X39251an) in lateral view\
15 & left scapula ( CAMSM X39251an) in medial view\

![image](./img/Pl32-Brachypterygius-teeth-pectoral.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & left humerus (CAMSM J67556) in dorsal view\
2 & left humerus (CAMSM J67556) in ventral view\
3 & left humerus (CAMSM J67556) in distal view\
4 & left forelimb (WESTM 1978.219) in dorsal view (anterior is to the
bottom)\

![image](./img/Pl33-Brachypterygius-humerus.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & hindlimb (NHMUK PV 46497a) in dorsal view\
2 & hindlimb (NHMUK PV 46497a) in ventral view\
3 & hindlimb (NHMUK PV 46497a) in proximal view\
4 & hindlimb (NHMUK PV 46497a) in anterior view\
5 & hindlimb (NHMUK PV 46497a) in posterior view\
\
\
\
6 & three cervical vertebral centra (NHMUK PV R5832) in anterior view\
7 & three cervical vertebral centra (NHMUK PV R5832) in dorsal view\
8 & three cervical vertebral centra (NHMUK PV R5832) in left lateral
view\

![image](./img/Pl34-Nannopterygius-Ichthyosauria.png)

rp11cm\
\
Fig. &\
1 & left humerus (NHMUK PV 42286) in dorsal view\
2 & left humerus (NHMUK PV 42286) in ventral view\
3 & left humerus (NHMUK PV 42286) in distal view\
4 & right humerus (OUMNH J68534) in dorsal view\
5 & right humerus (OUMNH J68534) in ventral view\
6 & right humerus (OUMNH J68534) in distal view\

![image](./img/Pl35-Ophthalmosauridae-humerus.png)

Supplementary data to Chapter 1 {#appendix:Ichthyosaurindet}
===============================

The following data is supplementary to
[\[chapter1\]](#chapter1){reference-type="ref" reference="chapter1"}.
Below are listed specimens of ichthyosaurs that cannot be referred with
certainty to one of the valid taxa described in
[1.5.1](#tax:taxavalida){reference-type="ref"
reference="tax:taxavalida"}. The referral present on the specimen label
is included.

llX\[-2\]X\[-2\]lX\[-2\]

\
Institution & Specimen & Contents & Horizon & Locality & Identification\

\
Institution & Specimen & Contents & Horizon & Locality & Identification\
CAMSM & J59986 & vertebral centrum & Corallian Group & North Kelsey,
Lincolnshire & ichthyosaur\
& J29781 & vertebra (cervical) & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Stretham,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J29782 & vertebra (cervical) & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Ely,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J29785 & vertebra (late dorsal) & Kimmeridge Clay Formation &
Chettisham, Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J29787 & vertebra (early caudal) & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Ely,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J29788 & vertebra (caudal) & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Ely,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J29791 & vertebra (mid-dorsal) & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Ely,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J29792 & vertebra (late dorsal) & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Ely,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J29793 & vertebra (late dorsal) & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Ely,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J29794 & vertebra (late dorsal) & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Ely,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J29795 & vertebra (mid-dorsal) & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Ely,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J64131--J64186 & vertebrae & Oxford Clay Formation & Fletton,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J64187--J64188 & vertebrae & Oxford Clay Formation & Fletton,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J64189 & vertebra & Oxford Clay Formation & Fletton, Cambridgeshire &
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J64190 & vertebra & Oxford Clay Formation & Fletton, Cambridgeshire &
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J64191 & vertebra & Oxford Clay Formation & Fletton, Cambridgeshire &
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
CAMSM & J64192 & vertebra & Oxford Clay Formation & Fletton,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J64193 & vertebra & Oxford Clay Formation & Fletton, Cambridgeshire &
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J65046--J65140 & vertebral centra & Oxford Clay Formation & Fletton,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J29857--J29859 & vertebrae & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Ely,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J65359--J65369 & phalanges & Oxford Clay Formation & Fletton,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J65590--J65639 & vertebra & Oxford Clay Formation & Whittlesey,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J65640--J65658 & metapodials, phalanges & Oxford Clay Formation &
Whittlesey, Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J65659 & bone & Oxford Clay Formation & Whittlesey, Cambridgeshire &
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J65714--J65747 & metapodials, phalanges & Oxford Clay Formation &
Peterborough, Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J65748--J65756 & metapodials & Oxford Clay Formation & Peterborough,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J65757 & coracoid (fragment) & Oxford Clay Formation & Peterborough,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J65758 & bone (fragment), coracoid? & Oxford Clay Formation &
Peterborough, Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J65759 & scapula (fragment) & Oxford Clay Formation & Peterborough,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J65760 & bone (fragment) & Oxford Clay Formation & Peterborough,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J65761 & scapula (fragment) & Oxford Clay Formation & Peterborough,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J65762 & bone (fragment) & Oxford Clay Formation & Peterborough,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J65763 & scapula (fragment) & Oxford Clay Formation & Peterborough,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J65764 & jaw articulation? & Oxford Clay Formation & Peterborough,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J65765 & bone (fragment) & Oxford Clay Formation & Peterborough,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J66207--J66237 & vertebra & Oxford Clay Formation & Whittlesey,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J66303--J66324 & vertebra & Oxford Clay Formation & Whittlesey,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J66331 & metapodial & Oxford Clay Formation & Whittlesey,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J66333 & axis vertebra & Oxford Clay Formation & Whittlesey,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J66341 & radius & Oxford Clay Formation & Whittlesey, Cambridgeshire &
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J66945--J66956 & vertebra & Oxford Clay Formation & Fletton,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J66957--J66967 & vertebra & Oxford Clay Formation & Fletton,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J66968--J66972 & metapodials & Oxford Clay Formation & Fletton,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J66973--J66997 & phalanges & Oxford Clay Formation & Fletton,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J67001 & bone & Oxford Clay Formation & Fletton, Cambridgeshire &
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J67003 & bone & Oxford Clay Formation & Fletton, Cambridgeshire &
*Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J67371 & bone (fragment) & Oxford Clay Formation & Fletton,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J67372 & bone (fragment), rib (2 fragments) & Oxford Clay Formation &
Fletton, Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J67373 & jaw (fragment) & Oxford Clay Formation & Fletton,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J67374--J67377 & phalanges & Oxford Clay Formation & Fletton,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J67668 & bone (fragment) & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Peterborough,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
CAMSM & J67669 & jaw (fragment) & Kimmeridge Clay Formation &
Peterborough, Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J67670 & skull? (fragment) & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Peterborough,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J67671 & femur (fragment) & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Peterborough,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J67673--J67674 & jaw? (fragments) & Kimmeridge Clay Formation &
Peterborough, Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J67679 & jaw (articulation) & Kimmeridge Clay Formation &
Peterborough, Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J67680 & metapodial & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Peterborough,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& J67681--J67689 & vertebra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Peterborough,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
GLAHM & V1582/1--20 & tooth fragments & Oxford Clay Formation &
Peterborough & ichthyosaur\
NHMUK & R4851 & snout portion & Middle Jurassic? & Kintradwell,
Sutherland & *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& 48041 & two vertebral centra & Cornbrash Formation? & Walton, Essex? &
*Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& 16057 & anterior presacral vertebral centrum & Cornbrash Formation? &
Naseby, Northamptonshire & *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& 47414 & left scapula & Cornbrash Formation?/Oxford Clay Formation? &
Peterborough, Cambridgeshire & *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& 47428a & caudal vertebral centrum & Oxford Clay Formation &
Whittlesey, Cambridgeshire & *Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus*\
& 47428 & anterior caudal vertebral centrum & Oxford Clay Formation &
Whittlesey, Cambridgeshire & *Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus*\
& 41646 & two vertebral centra & Unrecorded & Finchley, North London &
*Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& 47428 & posterior caudal vertebral centrum & Oxford Clay Formation &
Unrecorded & *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& 21430 & premaxilla, nasal, maxilla, lachrymal, fragments & Kimmeridge
Clay & Oxford Clay & Unrecorded & ichthyosaur\
& 46490 & six vertebral centra & Oxford Clay Formation & New Inn,
Torfaen & *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& R1794 & 33 vertebral centra & Oxford Clay Formation & Unrecorded &
*Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& 37294 & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Boulder Clay &
Brandon, Norfolk & *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& R1907 & anterior presacral vertebral centrum & Boulder Clay &
Lowestoft, Norfolk & *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& 39.186/20 & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Unrecorded &
Sadlers Wells Theatre, London & *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& 40552 & anterior presacral vertebral centrum & Boulder Clay? & Cromer
Cliffs, Norfolk & *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& 43197 & posterior caudal vertebral centrum & Boulder Clay & Muswell
Hill, London & *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& R6770 & tooth crown & Corallian Group & Malton, Yorkshire &
*Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& R1173 & coracoid & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Unrecorded &
*Ophthalmosaurus*?\
& 43298 & left scapula & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Weymouth, Dorset &
Ichthyosauridae\
& 43299 & right scapula & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Weymouth, Dorset &
Ichthyosauridae\
& 43296 & right coracoid & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Weymouth, Dorset
& ichthyosaur\
& 43297 & right scapula & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Weymouth, Dorset &
Ichthyosauridae\
& 20285 & five vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Ely,
Cambridgeshire & *Ichthyosaurus*\
& 41776a & two vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Weymouth,
Dorset & *Ichthyosaurus*\
& 42373 & left & right articulars & Kimmeridge Clay Formation &
Weymouth, Dorset & Ichthyosauridae\
NHMUK & 45908 & left articular & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Weymouth,
Dorset & Ichthyosauridae\
& Unlabelled & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Unrecorded &
Uffington, Oxfordshire & ichthyosaur\
& 46803 & left femur & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Foxhangers, Wiltshire
& *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*?\
& 46472 & left & right scapulae & Kimmeridge Clay Formation &
Broughton-Gifford, Wiltshire & Ichthyosauridae\
& 45984? & basisphenoid & basioccipital & Kimmeridge Clay Formation &
Swindon, Wiltshire & *Ichthyosaurus*? *dilatatus* (= *Brachypterygius
extremus*?)\
& 45985 & vertebral centra & Unrecorded & Unrecorded & *Ichthyosaurus*
dilatatus\
& Unlabelled & vertebrae & jaw fragments & Kimmeridge Clay Formation &
Unrecorded & ichthyosaur\
& Unlabelled & teeth, vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation &
Unrecorded & ichthyosaur\
& Unlabelled & vertebral centra, paddle elements & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Unrecorded & ichthyosaur\
& Unlabelled & vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Various &
ichthyosaur\
& 41236 & 35 vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Weymouth,
Dorset & ichthyosaur\
& Unlabelled & vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Unrecorded
& ichthyosaur\
& 40153 & right? lower jaw portion & Kimmeridge Clay Formation &
Kimmeridge Bay, Dorset & *Ichthyosaurus*? sp.\
& 45587 & snout portion & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon, Wiltshire
& *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& 46473 & seven vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation &
Foxhangers, Wiltshire & *Ichthyosaurus*\
& 44637 & 43 vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Weymouth,
Dorset & *Ichthyosaurus ovalis*\
& 41958 & left coracoid & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & & *Ichthyosaurus*\
& 42287 & left coracoid & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Isle of Portland,
Dorset & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*\
& 41957 & left scapula & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Weymouth, Dorset &
Ichthyosauridae\
& 46790 & left quadrate & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Foxhangers,
Wiltshire & Ichthyosauridae\
& 46791 & left quadrate & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Foxhangers,
Wiltshire & Ichthyosauridae\
& 40112 & right coracoid & Unrecorded & Unrecorded & ichthyosaur\
& R1683 & posterior caudal vertebral centrum & Portland Stone Formation
& Isle of Portland, Dorset & ichthyosaur\
& R1684 & caudal vertebral centrum & Portlandian & Isle of Portland,
Dorset & *Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus*?\
& R2175 & 57 vertebral centra, right coracoid & Oxford Clay Formation &
Peterborough, Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& R4124 & 8 anterior vertebral centra & Oxford Clay Formation &
Peterborough, Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& R5907 & 6 vertebral centra & Oxford Clay Formation & Warboys,
Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& R6382 & vertebral centrum & Oxford Clay Formation & Bletchley,
Buckinghamshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& R6417 & 3 cervical vertebral & Oxford Clay Formation & Bletchley,
Buckinghamshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& R6418 & 3 vertebral centra & Oxford Clay Formation & Bletchley,
Buckinghamshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
& R6769 & 2 caudal vertebral centra & Oxford Clay Formation & Weymouth,
Dorset & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\
OUMNH & J10574 & surangular, nasals, parietals, right quadrate, right?
Articular, basioccipital, 11 middle presacral vertebral centra &
Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Shotover Hill, Oxfordshire & ichthyosaur\
& J50336 & jaw bone? & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & \[Garsington\] &
ophthalmosaur?\
& J1626 & basisphenoid & Unrecorded & Unrecorded & '*Plesiosaurus*'
ichthyosaur\
& J50334 & parietal? & Unrecorded & Unrecorded & ophthalmosaur?\
& J1584 & basioccipital, basisphenoid, atlas-axis, \>50 vertebral
centra, ribs, all fragmentary & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon,
Wiltshire & *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& J68547 & left quadrate & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Heddington,
Oxfordshire & ichthyosaur\
& J68548 & right quadrate & Unrecorded & Unrecorded & ophthalmosaur\
& J10378 & left quadrate & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Shotover,
Oxfordshire & ichthyosaur\
& J10355 & quadrates, pterygoid?, stapes, supraoccipital fragments &
Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Shotover, Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& J10354 & basioccipital, right portion & Kimmeridge Clay Formation &
Shotover, Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& J10356 & basisphenoid & Unrecorded & Unrecorded & *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& J1584 & 27 vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon,
Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J48749 & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Swindon, Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J48750 & middle presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Swindon, Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J48752 & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Swindon, Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J48753 & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Swindon, Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J48738 & two posterior presacral vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Swindon, Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J48739 & vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon,
Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J48751 & two vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon,
Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J48737 & vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon,
Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J10485 & vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon,
Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J10504 & two vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon,
Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J12300 & vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon,
Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J10475 & vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon,
Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J10473 & vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon,
Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J10483 & vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon,
Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J12425 & vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon,
Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J12496 & vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon,
Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J12294 & vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Shotover,
Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*\
OUMNH & J12481 & vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay Formation &
Shotover, Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*\
& J12487 & vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Shotover,
Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*\
& J10502 & two anterior presacral vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Shotover, Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*\
& J12471 & anterior presacral vertebral centrum & Unrecorded &
Unrecorded & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*\
& J12123 & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Swindon, Wiltshire & *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& J48736 & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Swindon, Wiltshire & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*\
& J12065 & anterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Shotover, Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*\
& J12484 & anterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Shotover, Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*\
& J48734 & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Unrecorded & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*\
& J12064 & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Shotover, Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*\
& Unlabelled & right coracoid & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Headington,
Oxfordshire & ichthyosaur\
& Unlabelled & left coracoid & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Shotover,
Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus*\
& J13870 & left & right coracoids & Kimmeridge Clay Formation &
Stanford, Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& J12491 & six vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Weymouth,
Dorset & *Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus*\
& J10482 & two vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Shotover,
Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus* aff. *ovalis*\
& J12492 & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Wheatley, Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus*\
& J12489 & three vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation &
Shotover, Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus ovalis*\
& J10470 & anterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Shotover, Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& J12496 & anterior presacral vertebral centrum & Oxford Clay Formation
& Buckingham, Buckinghamshire & *Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus*\
& J12495 & anterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Duneham, Nottinghamshire? & *Ichthyosaurus thyreospondylus*\
& J1617 & juvenile, numerous fragments & Kimmeridge Clay Formation &
Swindon, Wiltshire & *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& Unlabelled & interclavicle broken & Kimmeridge Clay Formation? &
Unrecorded & ophthalmosaur?\
& J10369 & left scapula & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Garsington,
Oxfordshire & ichthyosaur\
& Unlabelled & left scapula & Kimmeridge Clay Formation? & Unrecorded &
ophthalmosaur?\
& J12385 & right clavicle & Kimmeridge Clay Formation? & Shotover,
Oxfordshire & ichthyosaur\
& Unlabelled & left coracoid & Kimmeridge Clay Formation? & Unrecorded &
ophthalmosaur\
& Unlabelled & left coracoid & Kimmeridge Clay Formation? & Unrecorded &
ophthalmosaur\
& J10387 & right coracoid & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon,
Wiltshire & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*?\
& J55619 & left coracoid & Unrecorded & Unrecorded & ichthyosaur\
& Unlabelled & right coracoid & Unrecorded & Unrecorded & ichthyosaur\
& J12294 & anterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Shotover, Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*\
& J12295 & anterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Shotover, Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*\
& J12482 & atlas-axis complex & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Shotover,
Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*?\
& J12298 & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Shotover, Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*\
& J12480 & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Buldon, Oxfordshire? & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*\
OUMNH & J12478 & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Shotover, Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*\
& J10488 & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Shotover, Oxfordshire & *Macropterygius* aff. *trigonus*\
& J48735 & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Swindon, Wiltshire & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*\
& J12483 & atlas-axis complex & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Shotover,
Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*\
& J10264 & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Shotover, Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus trigonus*\
& J48748 & five posterior presacral--anterior caudal vertebral centra &
Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Railway, Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus*\
& J12497 & anterior caudal vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay Formation
& Shotover, Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus*\
& J48747 & anterior caudal vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay Formation
& Shotover, Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus*\
& J48746 & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Marcham, Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus*\
& J12066 & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Headington, Oxfordshire & ichthyosaur\
& Unlabelled & two vertebral centra & Unrecorded & Drayton, Norfolk? &
ichthyosaur\
& J12306 & anterior presacral vertebral centrum & Unrecorded & Little
Wittenham, Oxfordshire & ichthyosaur\
& Unlabelled & anterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Culham, Oxfordshire & ichthyosaur\
& Unlabelled & caudal vertebral centrum & Unrecorded & Unrecorded &
ichthyosaur\
& Unlabelled & caudal centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Culham,
Oxfordshire & ichthyosaur\
& J12051 & anterior presacral vertebral centrum & Unrecorded &
Waterstock, Oxfordshire & ichthyosaur\
& J12301 & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Unrecorded &
Whitchurch, Buckinghamshire & ichthyosaur\
& J12485 & posterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Winslow, Buckinghamshire & ichthyosaur\
& J10509 & anterior presacral vertebral centrum & Unrecorded &
Waterstock, Oxfordshire & ichthyosaur\
& Unlabelled & 76 vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation &
Chawley, Oxfordshire & ichthyosaur\
& J50487 & atlas-axis, 13 vertebral centra & Unrecorded & Unrecorded &
ichthyosaur\
& J50488 & five vertebral centra & Unrecorded & Unrecorded &
ichthyosaur\
& J50489 & two vertebral centra & Unrecorded & Unrecorded & ichthyosaur\
& J50490 & two vertebral centra & Unrecorded & Unrecorded & ichthyosaur\
& J1588 & left femur & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon, Wiltshire &
ichthyosaur\
& Unlabelled & right opisthotic, rib fragments & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Swindon, Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J1589 & right scapula & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon, Wiltshire
& *Ichthyosaurus*\
& J1590 & twelve vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon,
Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J1609 & right scapula & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon, Wiltshire
& *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
& J1610 & anterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Uffington, Oxfordshire & ichthyosaur\
& J1611 & anterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Uffington, Oxfordshire & ichthyosaur\
& J1616 & anterior caudal vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay Formation
& Swindon, Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J1615 & anterior caudal vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay Formation
& Stratton, Oxfordshire? & ichthyosaur\
& Unlabelled & 22 rib fragments & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon,
Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& J1613--J1642 & vertebral centra, associated? & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Swindon, Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
OUMNH & Unlabelled & five vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation &
Swindon, Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& Unlabelled & 13 fragments & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Swindon,
Wiltshire & ichthyosaur?\
& Unlabelled & anterior presacral vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Swindon, Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& Unlabelled & anterior caudal vertebral centrum & Kimmeridge Clay
Formation & Swindon, Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& Unlabelled & four paddle elements & Kimmeridge Clay Formation &
Swindon, Wiltshire & ichthyosaur\
& Unlabelled & 95 vertebral centra & Upper Jurassic & Unrecorded &
ichthyosaur\
& J50496 & 35 vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Chawley,
Oxfordshire & ichthyosaur\
& J50491 & 15 vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Chawley,
Oxfordshire & ichthyosaur\
& J68536 & femur? & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Shotover, Oxfordshire &
ichthyosaur\
& J12042 & 94 vertebral centra & Kimmeridge Clay Formation & Cumnor,
Oxfordshire & *Ichthyosaurus* sp.\
PETMG & R226 & 62 vertebral centra & Oxford Clay Formation &
Peterborough, Cambridgeshire & *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus*\

Supplementary data to Chapter 2 {#appendix:Phylogeny}
===============================

The following data are included as supplementary data for
[2](#chapter2){reference-type="ref" reference="chapter2"}, intended to
be submitted as such. The section divisions have been retained.

Taxon list {#appB:Taxonlist}
----------

The following lists operational taxonomic units OTUs included in the
phylogenetic analysis in alphabetical order by genus − i.e. the order of
the data matrix input file − except for the outgroup taxon, *Hupehsuchus
nanchangensis*, which is listed first. General occurrence details are
given, but these are expanded in
[\[tbl301\]](#tbl301){reference-type="ref" reference="tbl301"}.

### Included taxa

1.  *Hupehsuchus nanchangensis* [Young & Dong, -@Young1972]: this taxon
    from the Early Triassic of China was used by @Motani1999c in his
    outgroup, and resolved as the immediate outgroup to Ichthyopterygia.
    While, *Hupehsuchus nanchangensis* has long been regarded as a close
    relative of ichthyosaurs, their true affinities were uncertain
    [@Carroll1991]. Recent redescription and analysis of the Hupehsuchia
    consistently positioned it as sister group to the ichthyosaurs in
    the clade Ichthyosauromorpha [@Chen2014], although the position of
    Ichthyosauromorpha within Diapsida remains unclear.

2.  *Acamptonectes densus* [Fischer *et al.*, -@Fischer2012];
    Hauterivian, Early Cretaceous of Germany and the UK: discovery of
    this taxon extended the known range of the Ophthalmosaurinae and has
    been recovered within a paraphyletic *Ophthalmosaurus* by
    @Fischer2012 [@Fischer2013a].

3.  *Aegirosaurus leptospondylus* [Wagner, -@Wagner1853]; Tithonian,
    Late Jurassic of Germany: originally described by @Wagner1853 as
    *Ichthyosaurus leptospondylus*, additional material was assigned and
    the taxonomy reappraised by @Bardet2000.

4.  *Arthropterygius chrisorum* [Russell, -@Russell1993]; Late Jurassic
    of Canada: *Ophthalmosaurus chrisorum* was revised to
    *Arthropterygius chrisorum* by @Maxwell2010. The known material is
    limited to the basicranium, left articular, numerous vertebrae,
    pectoral material and femora. This taxon was used to define
    Ophthalmosauridae by @Fischer2011c.

5.  *Athabascasaurus bitumineus* [Druckenmiller & Maxwell,
    -@Druckenmiller2010]; Albian, Early Cretaceous of Canada: the
    material of *Athabascasaurus bitumineus* consists of a largely
    complete specimen, although this has been crushed and not all
    elements are prepared completely.

6.  *Barracudasauroides panxianensis* [Jiang *et al.*, -@Jiang2006];
    Middle Triassic of China: this was originally described as
    *Mixosaurus panxianensis*, but was later separated by @Maisch2010
    based on the arrangement of the posterior skull.

7.  *Besanosaurus leptorhynchus* [Dal Sasso & Pinna, -@DalSasso1996];
    Middle Triassic of Italy.

8.  *Brachypterygius alekseevi* [Arkhangelsky, -@Arkhangelsky2001];
    Tithonian, Late Jurassic of Russia: this taxon and *Brachypterygius
    pseudoscythica* have been considered junior synonyms of
    *Brachypterygius extremus* [@McGowan2003]. Here, they are retained
    as separate pending formal reappraisal. The known material for
    either is largely incomplete, and largely restricted to pectoral
    material, which is poorly known for *Brachypterygius extremus*,
    making comparisons difficult.

9.  *Brachypterygius extremus* [Boulenger, -@Boulenger1904];
    Kimmeridgian−Tithonian of the UK: this taxon incorporates
    *Grendelius mordax* after @McGowan2003 and
    [\[Bextremus\]](#Bextremus){reference-type="ref"
    reference="Bextremus"}.

10. *Brachypterygius pseudoscythica* [Efimov, -@Efimov1998]; Tithonian
    of Russia: see comments for *Brachypterygius alekseevi*.

11. *Californosaurus perrini* [Merriam, -@Merriam1902]; Carnian of the
    USA: the material of *Californosaurus perrini* is missing the skull,
    although the postcranial material is largely complete.

12. *Callawayia neoscapularis* [McGowan, -@McGowan1994a]; Norian, Late
    Triassic of Canada: originally described as *Shastasaurus
    neoscapularis*, this was revised by both @Maisch2000c to *Callawayia
    neoscapularis* and @Nicholls2001 to *Metashastasaurus neoscapularis*
    in short succession; *Callawayia*, as the eldest nomen has priority.

13. *Cartorhynchus lenticarpus* [Motani *et al.*, -@Motani2014a]; Early
    Triassic of China: this most recently named taxon was recovered as
    the most basal ichthyosaur by @Motani2014a.

14. *Caypullisaurus bonapartei* [Fernández, -@Fernandez1997]; Late
    Jurassic−Early Cretaceous of Argentina.

15. *Chacaicosaurus cayi* [Fernández, -@Fernandez1994]; Bajocian, Middle
    Jurassic of Argentina: *Chacaicosaurus cayi* has been referred to
    *Stenopterygius* [@Fernandez2007a], but is here consistently found
    paraphyletic to this genus, so is retained as *Chacaicosaurus*.

16. *Chaohusaurus chaoxianensis* [Chen, -@Chen1985]; Early Triassic of
    China: this taxon was synonymised into *Chaohusaurus geishanensis*
    by @Motani1998c, but separated in @Motani2014. A revised diagnosis
    and description was included in @Motani2015. One of the previous
    defining features of *Chaohusaurus geishanensis* was the delayed
    ossification of the mesopodium in both fore- and hindlimbs; this is
    now found only in *Chaohusaurus chaoxianensis*.

17. *Chaohusaurus geishanensis* [Young & Dong, -@Young1972]; Early
    Triassic of China: see *Chaohusaurus chaoxianensis*.

18. *Chaohusaurus zhangjiawanensis* [Chen *et al.*, -@Chen2013]; Early
    Triassic of China.

19. *Contectopalatus atavus* [Quenstedt, -@Quenstedt1852]; Anisian of
    Germany: similar to *Barracudasauroides panxianensis*, @Maisch2010
    separated this taxon from *Phalarodon*, but @Liu2013 retained it
    within this genus.

20. *Cryopterygius kristiansenae* [Druckenmiller *et al.*,
    -@Druckenmiller2012a]; Tithonian, Late Jurassic of Spitsbergen.

21. *Cymbospondylus buchseri* [Sander, -@Sander1989]; Middle Triassic of
    Switzerland: see comments for *Cymbospondylus nichollsi*.

22. *Cymbospondylus nichollsi* [Fröbisch *et al.*, -@Frobisch2006];
    Middle Triassic of the USA: in their description of the skull of
    *Cymbospondylus nichollsi*, @Frobisch2006 identified possible
    postparietals posterior the parietals, which they suggested may be
    present in all species of *Cymbospondylus*. This conflicted with the
    interpretation of [@Maisch2004a], who identified a single
    interparietal between the two parietals. @Thorne2011 [character 18]
    coded this based upon @Frobisch2006: "parietal and supratemporal
    separated by an additional skull bone". Here, I also follow this
    interpretation (character 52), and apply it to *Cymbospondylus
    buchseri*, *Cymbospondylus nichollsi*, and *Cymbospondylus
    petrinus*, for which adequate skull material is known.

23. *Cymbospondylus petrinus* [Leidy, -@Leidy1868]; Middle Triassic of
    the USA: see comments for *Cymbospondylus nichollsi* and
    *Cymbospondylus piscosus*.

24. *Cymbospondylus piscosus* [Leidy, -@Leidy1868]; Middle Triassic of
    the USA: this is the type species of *Cymbospondylus* by priority:
    it was the first described by @Leidy1868, but consists only of a few
    non-diagnostic vertebrae. @McGowan2003 [66] stated that a formal
    appeal to the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature is
    in preparation. This aims to redefine *Cymbospondylus petrinus* as
    the best example of *Cymbospondylus*, and so should become the type
    of *Cymbospondylus piscosus*.

25. *Dearcmhara shawcrossi* [Brusatte *et al.,* -@Brusatte2015];
    Early−Middle Jurassic of the UK: the material of *Dearcmhara
    shawcrossi* consists of an incomplete humerus and three vertebrae
    that may not be part of the same individual; the humerus is the
    holotype. Various characters suggest assignment to Neoichthyosauria,
    but the two autapomorphies (concavity of leading edge anterodistal
    facet, and large and triangular supraulnar process) are contentious
    as these may be variably developed within species (see
    [\[OicenicusHumerus,BextremusHumerus\]](#OicenicusHumerus,BextremusHumerus){reference-type="ref"
    reference="OicenicusHumerus,BextremusHumerus"}). This taxon is
    retained as separate, but its incompleteness meant that it was
    immediately removed using STR.

26. *Eurhinosaurus longirostris* [Mantell, -@Mantell1851]; Toarcian,
    Early Jurassic of Germany.

27. *Excalibosaurus costini* [McGowan, -@McGowan1986]; Sinemurian, Early
    Jurassic of the UK: @Maisch2000c considered *Excalibosaurus* to be a
    junior subjective synonym *Eurhinosaurus*, although this has been
    refuted by new material [@McGowan2003a].

28. *Grippia longirostris* [Wiman, -@Wiman1929]; Early Triassic of
    Spitsbergen.

29. *Guizhouichthyosaurus tangae* [Cao & Luo in Yin *et al.* -@Yin2000];
    Carnian, Late Triassic of China: this taxon was later referred to
    *Shastasaurus* by @Shang2009, but this was not accepted by
    @Sander2011 from their phylogenetic analysis.

30. *Guizhouichthyosaurus wolonggangense* [Chen *et al.*, -@Chen2007];
    Carnian, Late Triassic of China: this taxon was originally referred
    to *Callawayia*, but later combined into *Guizhouichthyosaurus*
    [@Maisch2010]. The analysis here found good support for their sister
    relationship, so this is retained here.

31. *Gulosaurus helmi* [Cuthbertson *et al.*, -@Cuthbertson2013a];
    Early−Middle Triassic of Canada: the postcranial material of the
    holotype of *Gulosaurus helmi* was described as *Grippia*
    cf. *longirostris* by @Brinkman1992, but the cranial material and
    taxonomy was subsequently revised by @Cuthbertson2013a.

32. *Hauffiopteryx typicus* [Maisch, -@Maisch2008b]; Toarcian of Germany
    and the UK: *Hauffiopteryx typicus* was erected in Maisch's
    [-@Maisch2000b] revision of *Stenopterygius*. The previous taxa
    comprised in *Hauffiopteryx* are summarised by @Maxwell2012
    [fig. 1]. Same of the Toarcian material of Strawberry Bank, UK was
    assigned to *Hauffiopteryx typicus* was revisited by @Marek2015, but
    was not resolved in phylogeny with *Hauffiopteryx*. However, this
    materail has been used to code *Hauffiopteryx typicus* here, pending
    revision of the Strawberry bank material.

33. *Himalayasaurus tibetensis* [Young & Dong, -@Young1972]; Norian,
    Late Triassic of Tibet: like *Cymbospondylus piscosus*, this taxon
    is known from limited remains. These are, however, likely to be from
    an ichthyosaur, and are unusual, so have been coded.

34. *Hudsonelpidia brevirostris* [McGowan, -@McGowan1995]; Norian,
    Canada.

35. *Ichthyosaurus acutirostris* [Owen, -@Owen1840]: @Maisch2010 [165]
    did not consider *Ichthyosaurus acutirostris* to truly be a member
    of *Ichthyosaurus*, labelling it *"Ichthyosaurus" acutirostris*. As
    this taxon is poorly defined, many specimens may be improperly
    assigned, so that coding this taxon is problematic. Here,
    *Ichthyosaurus acutirostris* has been coded based on specimens
    assigned by @Owen1881 [@Huene1922b; @Fraas1891], primarily skull
    material.

36. *Ichthyosaurus anningae* [Lomax & Massare, -@Lomax2015];
    Sinemurian−Pliensbachian, Early Jurassic of the UK.

37. *Ichthyosaurus breviceps* [Owen, -@Owen1881]; Early Jurassic of the
    UK: specimens of *Ichthyosaurus* are numerous and suffer from poor
    definition of species. These taxa coded here are the most generally
    accepted and are coded preferentially from type material
    [@McGowan1974a].

38. *Ichthyosaurus communis* [Conybeare, -@Conybeare1822]; Early
    Jurassic of the UK: see *Ichthyosaurus breviceps*.

39. *Ichthyosaurus conybeari* [Lydekker, -@Lydekker1888]; Early Jurassic
    of the UK: see *Ichthyosaurus breviceps*.

40. *Isfjordosaurus minor* [Wiman, -@Wiman1910]: originally named
    *Pessopteryx minor*, @Motani1999c reappraised the holotype humerus
    stating its similarities to *Utatsusaurus hataii*, but considering
    it diagnostic for a new genus. No other material is known from this
    taxon, and its ichthyosaur affinities have been questioned
    [@Maxwell2013a].

41. *Janusaurus lundi* [Roberts *et al.*, -@Roberts2014]; Tithonian,
    Late Jurassic of Spitsbergen.

42. *Leninia stellans* [Fischer *et al.*, -@Fischer2014]; Aptian, Early
    Cretaceous of Russia: *Leninia stellans* is known only from a
    partial skull, but shows clear ophthalmosaurid affinities.

43. *Leptonectes moorei* [McGowan & Milner, -@McGowan1999a];
    Pliensbachian, Early Jurassic of the UK.

44. *Leptonectes solei* [McGowan, -@McGowan1993]; Sinemurian, Early
    Jurassic of the UK: the holotype of this large ichthyosaur is very
    complete, but not well preserved.

45. *Leptonectes tenuirostris* [Conybeare, -@Conybeare1822]; Early
    Jurassic of the UK: like *Ichthyosaurus* above, the taxonomy of
    *Leptonectes* suffers from historical baggage and the apparent glut
    of material known. Coding of this taxon comes mostly from the
    material assigned by @McGowan1996a [@McGowan1989].

46. *Macgowania janiceps* [McGowan, -@McGowan1996]; Norian, Late
    Triassic of Canada.

47. *Maiaspondylus lindoei* [Maxwell & Caldwell, -@Maxwell2006a];
    Albian, Early Cretaceous of Canada: *Maiaspondylus lindoei* is known
    from little material, but this has several diagnostic features of
    the skull and humerus to be confident about its validity.

48. *Malawania anachronus* [Fischer *et al.*, -@Fischer2013a];
    Hauterivian−barremian, Early Cretaceous of Iraq: *Malawania
    anachronus* is known from a poorly preserved specimen, but preserves
    much of the pectoral girdle and forelimb.

49. *Mikadocephalus gracilirostris* [Maisch & Matzke, -@Maisch1997c];
    Middle Triassic of Switzerland: @McGowan2003 held *Mikadocephalus
    gracilirostris* as a *species inquirenda*, citing the large number
    of monotypic genera from the Grenzbitumenzone, and the uncertain
    status of the similar taxon *Pessosaurus polaris*. *Mikadocephalus
    gracilirostris* has recently been used in phylogenetic analyses of
    the Parvipelvia [@Fischer2013a], so its inclusion is deemed
    relevant.

50. *Mixosaurus cornalianus* [Bassani, -@Bassani1886]; Middle Triassic
    of Italy and Switzerland.

51. *Mixosaurus kuhnschneyderi* [Brinkmann, -@Brinkmann1998]; Middle
    Triassic of Italy.

52. *Mixosaurus xindianensis* [Chen & Cheng, -@Chen2010]; Anisian,
    Middle Triassic of China.

53. *Mollesaurus periallus* [Fernández, -@Fernandez1999]; Bajocian of
    Argentina: @Maisch2010 considered *Mollesaurus* to be a junior
    synonym of *Ophthalmosaurus*, but more recent finds has shown
    characters that suggest the two should remain in separate genera.

54. *Nannopterygius enthekiodon* [Hulke, -@Hulke1871]; Late Jurassic of
    the UK; see [\[Nenthekiodon\]](#Nenthekiodon){reference-type="ref"
    reference="Nenthekiodon"}.

55. *Ophthalmosaurus icenicus* [Seeley, -@Seeley1874];
    Callovian−Oxfordian of France and the UK: see
    [\[Oicenicus\]](#Oicenicus){reference-type="ref"
    reference="Oicenicus"}.

56. *Ophthalmosaurus natans* [Marsh, -@Marsh1879]; Oxfordian, Late
    Jurassic of the USA.

57. *Ophthalmosaurus yasykovi* [Efimov, -@Efimov1999]; Tithonian, Late
    Jurassic of Russia: the taxon series described for *Yasykovia*
    included four species that likely represent the same taxon, although
    differences may be important at the specific or generic level.
    Coding for this taxon is primarily based on the most complete
    example, and type specimen, of *Ophthalmosaurus yasykovi*. See also
    *Paraophthalmosaurus kabanovi*.

58. *Palvennia hoybergeti* [Druckenmiller *et al.*,
    -@Druckenmiller2012a]; Tithonian, Late Jurassic of Spitsbergen:
    *Palvennia hoybergeti* is only known from a brevirostrine skull, but
    this is articulated and well preserved.

59. *Paraophthalmosaurus kabanovi* [Efimov, -@Efimov1999]; Tithonian,
    Late Jurassic of Russia: this taxon was described as *Yasykovia
    yasykovi* by @Efimov1999, but synonymised with *Ophthalmosaurus
    yasykovi* by @Maisch2000c. @Arkhangelsky2014 found this taxon be
    separate and sister to *Paraophthalmosaurus saveljeviensis* in their
    phylogenetic analysis, so it is putatively included in
    *Paraophthalmosaurus* and coded separately.

60. *Paraophthalmosaurus saveljeviensis* [Arkhangelsky,
    -@Arkhangelsky1997]; Tithonian, Late Jurassic of Russia: similar to
    *Brachypterygius alekseevi* and *Brachypterygius pseudoscythica*
    above, this taxon has suffered from poor preservation and
    description, but is likewise retained as distinct. It was included
    as *Ophthalmosaurus saveljeviensis* by @Maisch2000c, but found to be
    distinct by @Arkhangelsky2014.

61. *Parvinatator wapitiensis* [Nicholls & Brinkman, -@Nicholls1995];
    Olenekian, Early Triassic of Canada: in the original description of
    this taxon, @Nicholls1995 [522−523] interpreted the posterior of the
    skull different to previous authors. Here, I have maintained the
    consensus homologies.

62. *Pervushovisaurus bannovkensis* [Arkhangelsky, -@Arkhangelsky1998a];
    Cenomanian, Late Cretaceous of Russia: this taxon was originally
    described in a revision of *Platypterygius* as *Platypterygius
    (Pervushovisaurus) bannovkensis*. In redescription, @Fischer2014b
    affirmed its generic separateness. The subgeneric nomen
    *Pervushovisaurus* may be retained as the formal generic name as it
    is part of the generic name group.

63. *Pessopteryx nisseri* [Wiman, -@Wiman1910]; Early Triassic of
    Spitsbergen: similar to *Isfjordosaurus minor*, @Motani1999c
    separated *Pessopteryx nisseri* based on diagnostic humeral
    material. Not all material assigned to *Pessopteryx nisseri* is
    included in this taxon as some was later referred to *Omphalosaurus
    nisseri* (see below; [@Merriam1911; @Wiman1916]).

64. *Phalarodon callawayi* [Schmitz *et al.*, -@Schmitz2004]; Anisian,
    Middle Triassic of Spitsbergen and the USA.

65. *Phalarodon fraasi* [Merriam, -@Merriam1910]; Anisian of China and
    Germany: @Schmitz2005 concluded that *Mixosaurus nordenskioeldii*
    does not represent a valid taxon, and that *Mixosaurus fraasi*
    should be recognised as valid. Various authors have disagreed on
    this taxon's placement in either *Phalarodon* or *Mixosaurus* [e.g.
    @McGowan2003; @Maisch2010].

66. *Phalarodon major* [Huene, -@Huene1916]; Middle Triassic of
    Switzerland.

67. *Phantomosaurus neubigi* [Sander, -@Sander1997]; Anisian, Middle
    Triassic of Germany.

68. *Platypterygius americanus* [Nace, -@Nace1939]; Albian−Cenomanian,
    Early−Late Cretaceous of the USA.

69. *Platypterygius australis* [M'Coy, -@MCoy1867]; Albian, Early
    Cretaceous of Australia.

70. *Platypterygius bedengensis* [Efimov, -@Efimov1997]; Hauterivian,
    Early Cretaceous of Russia: this material is largely complete, but
    has been only briefly described, so its true taxonomy is uncertain.
    @McGowan2003 considered it to be certainly *Platypterygius*, but not
    diagnostic to species.

71. *Platypterygius hauthali* [Huene, -@Huene1927]; Barremian, Early
    Cretaceous of Argentina.

72. *Platypterygius hercynicus* [Kuhn, -@Kuhn1946]; Aptian, Early
    Cretaceous of Germany: recently, *P. hercynicus* has been
    re-described twice [@Kolb2009; @Fischer2011b]. Much of the data is
    congruent.

73. *Platypterygius ochevi* [Arkhangelsky *et al.*, -@Arkhangelsky2008];
    Albian−Cenomanian, Cretaceous of Russia.

74. *Platypterygius platydactylus* [Broili, -@Broili1907]; Aptian, Early
    Cretaceous of Germany. @Motani1999 [fig. 7 D] interpreted the
    homologies of the forelimb of *Platypterygius platydactylus*
    reversed anteroposteriorly; this has been rectified in the coding
    here.

75. *Platypterygius sachicarum* [Páramo, -@Paramo1997];
    Barremian−Aptian, Early Cretaceous of Colombia: although incomplete,
    this material appears to represent a distinct species from other
    *Platypterygius* [@Maisch2010].

76. *Qianichthyosaurus xingyiensis* Ji, Jiang & Motani in [Yang *et
    al.*, -@Yang2013]; Ladinian, Middle Triassic of China: this taxon
    was coded from a the original description in Chinese, however, not
    all details of the specimen were available, and the photographs
    available were not usable to compensate this.

77. *Qianichthyosaurus zhoui* [Li, -@Li1999]; Ladinian, middle Triassic
    of China.

78. *Quasianosteosaurus vikinghoegdai* [Maisch & Matzke, -@Maisch2003c];
    Early Triassic of Spitsbergen: the holotype material of this taxon
    is largely a fragmented cast of a skull; although fragmentary, this
    material shows ichthyosaur affinities.

79. *Shastasaurus alexandrae* [Merriam, -@Merriam1902]; Carnian, Late
    Triassic of the USA: *Shastasaurus alexandrae* has been referred to
    *Shastasaurus pacificus* [@McGowan2003], but is here retained as
    separate.

80. *Shastasaurus liangae* (Yin, in [@Yin2000]); Carnian, Late Triassic
    of China: this was originally referred to *Guanlingsaurus*, but has
    since been recovered within *Shastasaurus* in phylogenetic analyses
    [@Sander2011].

81. *Shastasaurus pacificus* [Merriam, -@Merriam1895]; Carnian, Late
    Triassic of the USA.

82. *Shastasaurus sikkaniensis* [Nicholls & Manabe, -@Nicholls2004];
    Norian, Late Triassic of Canada.

83. *Shonisaurus popularis* [Camp, -@Camp1976]; Carnian, Late Triassic
    of the USA.

84. *Simbirskiasaurus birjukovi* [Otschev & Efimov, -@Otschev1985];
    Barremian, Early Cretaceous of Russia: similar to *Pervushovisaurus
    bannovkensis*, *Simbirskiasaurus birjukovi* was revised as a
    separate taxon by @Fischer2014b, with the subgeneric nomen
    *Simbirskiasaurus* being available.

85. *Sisteronia seeleyi* [Fischer *et al.*, -@Fischer2014a]; Cenomanian,
    Late Cretaceous of the UK.

86. *Stenopterygius aaleniensis* [Maxwell *et al.*, -@Maxwell2012b];
    Aalenian, Middle Jurassic of Germany.

87. *Stenopterygius quadriscissus* [Quenstedt, -@Quenstedt1858];
    Toarcian, Early Jurassic of Germany: *Stenopterygius quadriscissus,
    Stenopterygius triscissus,* and *Stenopterygius uniter* are coded
    according to their revision by @Maisch2008b. A summary of referrals
    from previous taxa is given by @Maxwell2012 [fig. 1].

88. *Stenopterygius triscissus* [Quenstedt, -@Quenstedt1858]; Toarcian,
    Early Jurassic of Germany and the UK: see *Stenopterygius
    quadriscissus*.

89. *Stenopterygius uniter* [Huene, -@Huene1931b]; Toarcian, Early
    Jurassic of Germany: see *Stenopterygius quadriscissus*.

90. *Suevoleviathan disinteger* [Huene, -@Huene1926]; Toarcian, Early
    Jurassic of Germany.

91. *Suevoleviathan integer* [Bronn, -@Bronn1844a]; Toarcian, Early
    Jurassic of Germany.

92. *Sveltonectes insolitus* [Fischer *et al.*, -@Fischer2011c];
    Barremian, Early Cretaceous of Russia.

93. *Temnodontosaurus azerguensis* [Martin *et al.*, -@Martin2012];
    Toarcian, Early Jurassic of France.

94. *Temnodontosaurus eurycephalus* [McGowan, -@McGowan1974];
    Sinemurian, Early Jurassic of the UK: only one skull of
    *Temnodontosaurus eurycephalus* is known, described by @Owen1881
    [@McGowan1974].

95. *Temnodontosaurus nuertingensis* [Huene, -@Huene1931];
    Pliensbachian, Early Jurassic of Germany.

96. *Temnodontosaurus platyodon* [Conybeare, -@Conybeare1822];
    Hettangian−Sinemurian, Early Jurassic of the UK.

97. *Temnodontosaurus trigonodon* [Theodori, -@Theodori1843]; Toarcian,
    Early Jurassic of Germany.

98. *Thaisaurus chonglakmanii* [Mazin *et al.*, -@Mazin1991]; Early
    Triassic of Thailand: the holotype specimen of *T. chonglakmanii* is
    not fully prepared, although it is similar to *Chaohusaurus*
    [@McGowan2003], but most data has been taken from @Mazin1991.

99. *Thalattoarchon saurophagis* [Fröbisch *et al.*, -@Frobisch2013];
    Anisian, Middle Triassic of the USA.

100. *Tholodus schmidi* [Meyer, -@Meyer1849]; Ladinian, Middle Triassic
     of Germany & Switzerland: the position of *Tholodus* as an
     ichthyosaur is uncertain due to its incompleteness, and affinities
     to both ichthyosaurs and the Omphalosauridae, which is generally
     considered to be non-ichthyopterygian [@Motani2000a]. It has been
     included here to test whether it falls within Ichthyosauriformes,
     but its low completeness makes these results spurious.

101. *Toretocnemus californicus* [Merriam, -@Merriam1903]; Carnian, Late
     Triassic of the USA: *Toretocnemus californicus* is known only from
     limb material, assigned to this genus based on its affinities with
     *Toretocnemus zitteli*.

102. *Toretocnemus zitteli* [Merriam, -@Merriam1903]; Carnian, Late
     Triassic of the USA.

103. *Undorosaurus gorodischensis* [Efimov, -@Efimov1999a]; Tithonian,
     Late Jurassic of Russia.

104. *Undorosaurus trautscholdi* [Arkhangelsky & Zverkov,
     -@Arkhangelsky2014]; Tithonian, Late Jurassic of Russia:
     *Undorosaurus trautscholdi* was described based on a
     ophthalmosaurid forelimb, but no other material is known.

105. *Utatsusaurus hataii* [Shikama *et al.*, -@Shikama1978]; Olenekian,
     Early Triassic of Japan.

106. *Wimanius odontopalatus* [Maisch & Matzke, -@Maisch1998a]; Middle
     Triassic of Switzerland: the incomplete skull holotype of *Wimanius
     odontopalatus* caused @McGowan2003 to question its validity, but
     this material has not been reviewed recently, so is retained as
     separate.

107. *Xinminosaurus catactes* [Jiang *et al.*, -@Jiang2008a]; Anisian,
     Middle Triassic of China.

### Excluded taxa {#appB:excludedtaxa}

The follow were not included either because of their recent exclusion
from Ichthyosauriformes/Ichthyopterygia, or because data was not
available at the time of creating the data matrix.

1.  *Cetarthrosaurus walkeri* [Seeley, -@Seeley1869]: this taxon was
    considered invalid by @McGowan2003. The specimen consists of a
    single propodial, described as a femur by @Seeley1869 [64−65], but
    referred to Mosasauridae by Hulke in @Lydekker1888. The material was
    revisited by @Fischer2014a [17−19], who considered it to be
    ichthyosaurian, but were uncertain whether the material represented
    a humerus or femur. This conservative identification is followed
    here, meaning that this taxon cannot be coded in the matrix.

2.  *Omphalosaurus* [Merriam, -@Merriam1906]: all species referred to
    *Omphalosaurus* are excluded as the assignment of this taxon to
    Ichthyosauriformes is uncertain
    [@Motani2000a; @Maisch2000c; @Sander2003]. Early finds of
    *Omphalosaurus* from Nevada, USA, and Spitsbergen, but did not
    considered the material to be ichthyosauriform, despite associated
    ichthyosaur remains that were referred to *Pessopteryx*; the
    separation of this material (originally referred to *Pessopteryx
    nisseri* has proved problematic)
    [@Merriam1906; @Wiman1910; @Merriam1911a; @Wiman1916]. @Mazin1983a
    revisited the Spitsbergen material of *Pessopteryx nisseri*,
    treating it as a single individual, and referring this to
    *Omphalosaurus*, which was followed by @Sander1998 [@Tichy1995].
    @Motani1999c separated the type material of *Pessopteryx nisseri*
    into omphalosaurid jaw and ichthyosauriform postcranial portions
    based upon the remarks of @Wiman1910 [@Wiman1916], assigning the
    nomen *Pessopteryx nisseri* only to the ichthyosauriform postcranial
    part. @Maisch2000c did the same, but applied the name *Pessopteryx
    nisseri* to the omphalosaurid portion, erecting *Rotundopteryx
    hulkei* for the ichthyosauriform remains; this was considered
    invalid by @McGowan2003. @Motani2000a [@Sander2003] discussed the
    affinities of *Omphalosaurus* in a phylogenetic context, reaching
    differing conclusions based upon synapomorphies found in
    phylogenetic hypotheses [@Motani1999c; @Maisch2000c; @Sander2000],
    and interpretation of poorly preserved material. A test of the
    affinities of *Omphalosaurus* would require completion of a broader
    phylogeny of Mesozoic (marine) reptiles; this is beyond the scope of
    this study.

3.  *Platypterygius campylodon* [Carter, -@Carter1846]: this taxon may
    be formed of a conglomeration of many taxa, and material is need of
    revision. @McGowan2003 based much of their description of this taxon
    upon the material of @Kiprijanoff1881, however, this derives from a
    bonebed that contains material from a variety of taxa (V. Fischer,
    pers. comm.  December 2015). The validity of this species is
    questionable.

4.  *Temnodontosaurus crassimanus* [Blake, @Blake1876]: is known from a
    single specimen from the Lower Jurassic of the UK, but has been
    poorly described [@Blake1876; @Melmore1930], so is excluded.

Character list {#appB:Characterlist}
--------------

These characters are taken from previous analyses, and a few are newly
added. Where characters have been modified, this is largely to follow
reductive coding methods, as recommended by @Strong1999 [@Brazeau2011].
This required separating several original characters into two: (1)
presence/absence of feature, and (2) description of feature.
Modifications for other reasons are noted after each character. New
characters are marked by an asterisk. Four characters are treated as
ordered, as they have been previously by @Fischer2012 [@Fischer2013a]:
characters 100, 204, 205, and 219.

### Skull

1.  Snout − extremely slender premaxillary segment, \<  1/4 the maximum
    lateral width of the posterior of the skull: (0) absent (1) present
    [@Motani1999c character 34]. This is modified from Motani's
    [-@Motani1999c] character 34 by defining a specific boundary of
    'slender'. Motani's original character separates several taxa,
    especially his 'Eurhinosauria'. To maintain this distinction this
    character is defined as the width of the snout where the premaxillae
    exclude the nasals from dorsal view − the nasals anteriormost dorsal
    exposure − compared to the maximum width of the post-snout skull.

2.  Premaxilla − supranarial process: (0) present (1) absent [modified
    from @Maisch2000c character 9; and @Maxwell2012 character 1].
    Characters two to five are modified for reductive coding from Maisch
    and Matzke's characters 9 and 10, and Maxwell *et al.*'s character
    1: presence/absence, then size is coded for each of the supra- and
    subnarial processes of the premaxilla.

3.  Premaxilla − size of supranarial process: (0) large, extending \> 
    1/3 of the external narial length (1) small, extending \<  1/3 of
    the external narial length [modified from @Maisch2000c character
    9; and @Maxwell2012 character 1].

4.  Premaxilla − subnarial process: (0) absent (1) present [modified
    from @Maisch2000c character 10; and @Maxwell2012 character 1].

5.  Premaxilla − size of the subnarial process: (0) small, extending \< 
    1/3 of the external narial length (1) large, extending \>  1/3 of
    the external narial length [modified from @Maisch2000c character
    10; and @Maxwell2012 character 1].

6.  Premaxilla-palatine − contact in ventral view: (0) absent (1)
    present, relatively broad [@Druckenmiller2010 character 15].

7.  Maxilla − reduction: (0) absent, ≥  1/2 of the length of the
    snout (1) present, \<  1/2 the length of the snout [modified from
    @Sander2011 character 106]. The reduction of the maxilla is defined
    more specifically than Sander *et al.*'s [-@Sander2011]
    character 106. While this is defined relative to the length of the
    snout as a whole, the dorsoventral exposure and contribution should
    also be considered (see character nine).

8.  Maxilla − bearing teeth: (0) present (1) absent. See character
    seven.

9.  Maxilla − location of the laterally exposed greatest dorsoventral
    extent: (0) posterior to the external naris (1) ventral or anterior
    to the external naris [modified from @Druckenmiller2010 character
    4]. State one has been modified to include 'ventral to the external
    naris'.

10. Maxilla − length of the premaxillary process: (0) short, extends
    approximately one or less narial lengths anterior to the external
    naris (1) long, extends approximately 1.5 or more narial lengths
    anterior to the external naris [@Maxwell2012 character 2].

11. Maxilla − postnarial process exposed laterally: (0) present (1)
    absent [modified from @Maisch2000c character 11; after @Fischer2011c
    character 9]. The postnarial process of the maxilla is a dorsal
    extension of the maxilla posterior to the external naris, this is
    the *processus postnarialis* of @Maisch1997c. It is equivalent to
    the dorsal lamina of @Motani1999c and the narial process of
    @Fischer2011c. It is also likely the same as the posterior ascending
    process of @Druckenmiller2010, although @Maisch2000c clearly state
    that it is not found in post-Triassic ichthyosaurs, whereas
    @Druckenmiller2010 only code it certainly for this group. This
    character, and character 12, has been separated from its single
    original character for reductive coding.

12. Maxilla − size of the postnarial process exposure: (0) large (1)
    tiny [modified from @Maisch2000c character 11; after @Fischer2011c
    character 9]. Clarified that this refers to exposure of the
    postnarial process.

13. Maxilla − size of the jugal process: (0) long, extending as far
    under the orbit as the lachrymal in lateral view (1) short, hidden
    in lateral view by the jugal [@Maxwell2012 character 3].

14. Maxilla − contacts prefrontal: (0) absent (1) present [@Maisch2000c
    character 12].

15. \*Maxilla − contacts external naris in external lateral view: (0)
    present (1) absent. This new character separates those taxa in which
    the maxilla does not form part of the external border to the
    external naris due to exclusion by other elements, usually by the
    subnarial process of the premaxilla and lachrymal.

16. Nasal − anteroposterior extent of dorsal exposure in the prenarial
    rostrum: (0) substantial, over 40% (1) reduced, less than 40%
    [@Maxwell2012 character 4].

17. Nasal posterior extent: (0) reaches back to the orbit (1) reaches
    distinctly over the orbit [@Maisch2000c character 14].

18. Narial shelf: (0) absent (1) present [@Jiang2006 character 4]. This
    narial shelf is anterior to the external naris, bordered medially by
    the nasosupraorbital ridge [@Jiang2006].

19. Nasal − borders external naris: (0) present (1) excluded
    [@Sander2000 character 7].

20. Nasal − descending process on the interior posterior border of the
    nares: (0) absent (1) present [@Fernandez2007 character 2].

21. Nasal-postfrontal − contact: (0) absent (1) present [modified from
    @Nicholls2001 character 3]. This character and the next are modified
    based on reinterpretations of the skull, particularly
    *Ichthyosaurus* and *Stenopterygius* [@Motani2005a; @Maxwell2012].
    Narrow contact between the nasal and postfrontal allows medial
    exposure of the prefrontal in *Ichthyosaurus* and *Stenopterygius*.
    This still allows contact between the prefrontal and frontal, which
    was excluded by @Nicholls2001 [character 3]. The size of the
    nasal-postfrontal contact is now taken into account, and its effect
    on the medial exposure of the prefrontal.

22. Nasal-postfrontal contact − size: (0) small (1) extensive,
    separating frontals and prefrontals in dorsal view [modified from
    @Nicholls2001 character 3]. See character 21.

23. *Excavatio internasalis*: (0) absent (1) present [@Maisch2000c
    character 16].

24. Lachrymal − anterior extent: (0) reaches external naris (1) is
    excluded from the external naris by the dorsal process of the
    maxilla and/or the ventral process of the nasal [@Sander2000
    character 10]. The polarity of this character was reversed by
    @Maxwell2012 [character 5].

25. Lachrymal − numerous small-to-medium-sized nutritive foramina: (0)
    absent (1) present [@Sander2011 character 111]. This character
    refers to millimetre-size nutritive foramina that perforate the
    lachrymal.

26. External nares − shape: (0) small, round to ovate (1) elongate (2)
    elongate and complexly lobate [@Sander2000 character 8]. As this
    character defines shape, states one and two are considered suitably
    different that this should not be coded with reductive methods.

27. External nares − orientation: (0) dorsolateral (1) lateral, scarcely
    visible in dorsal view [@Motani1999c character 4].

28. Jugal − shape: (0) triradiate (1) lunate or [J]{.sans-serif}-shaped
    [@Motani1999c character 24]. Compare this with character 31.

29. Jugal − anterior margin shape: (0) tapering, running between the
    lachrymal and maxilla (1) broad and fanlike, covering a large area
    of the maxilla ventrolaterally [@Druckenmiller2010 character 6].

30. Jugal − extent of anterior margin: (0) terminates posterior to the
    anterior end of the lachrymal (1) reaches or surpasses the anterior
    end of the lachrymal [@Roberts2014 character 11].

31. Jugal − dorsal ramus shape: (0) well-developed and strongly curved
    dorsally (1) poorly developed, jugal essentially straight
    [@Maxwell2012 character 8]. This character is exclusive of character
    28: poor development of the dorsal ramus does not preclude a
    [J]{.sans-serif}-shaped or triradiate jugal, although this may be
    less apparent.

32. Jugal − contact between the postorbital process and the
    squamosal: (0) absent (1) present [@Sander2000 character 31].

33. Jugal-quadratojugal − external contact: (0) absent (1) present
    [@Motani1999c character 23]. This was included as a new character by
    @Roberts2014, who explicitly included the​ postorbital to separate
    the jugal and quadratojugal.

34. Jugal-quadratojugal notch − deep, forming a pronounced ventral
    emargination of the cheek: (0) present (1) absent [@Jiang2005a
    character 24]. This character is exclusive of character 79 as the
    ventral margin of the quadratojugal may be concave without forming a
    distinct emargination of the cheek.

35. Prefrontal − dorsal exposure: (0) broadly exposed (1) present, but
    limited by the anterior process of the postfrontal and posterior
    process of the nasal (2) little to none [modified from @Maxwell2012
    character 12]. This character has been modified to reflect the state
    of the more inclusive clade than in the original study.
    Additionally, the state "absent anterior to the parietal" has been
    removed, as the presence of this is uncertain
    [@Maisch2000c; @McGowan2003].

36. Prefrontal-external naris − contact: (0) absent (1) present
    [@Druckenmiller2010 character 7].

37. Prefrontal-postfrontal − contact: (0) absent, the dorsal margin of
    the orbit is formed by the frontal (1) present, eliminating the
    frontal from the dorsal margin of the orbit [@Motani1999c character
    8]. This character incorporates the revised interpretation of the
    skull of *Ichthyosaurus* and *Stenopterygius* [@Motani2005a], but
    character states may have been revised. This also applies to
    subsequent skull roof characters.

38. Prefrontal and postfrontal − high supraorbital crest: (0) absent (1)
    present [@Maisch2000c character 22].

39. Frontals − dorsal view: (0) strongly convex at the anterior edge of
    the parietal foramen (1) flat to concave, overlapped by surrounding
    elements [@Maxwell2012 character 13]. Overlapping by surrounding
    elements may be separated into another character, however, this has
    not clearly been seen to warrant this distinction.

40. Frontal − location of the widest exposure: (0) located
    posteriorly (1) at nasal suture [@Motani1999c character 15].

41. Frontal − temporal process: (0) absent (1) present [@Fischer2011c
    character 14].

42. Frontal − participates in the supratemporal fenestra in dorsal
    view: (0) absent (1) present [modified from @Druckenmiller2010
    character 9]. This and the next character are separated for
    reductive coding.

43. Frontal − size of participation in the supratemporal fenestra: (0)
    small (1) extensive [modified from @Druckenmiller2010 character 9].

44. Frontal and parietal − relative dorsal exposure size: (0) frontal as
    large or larger than the parietal (1) frontal smaller than the
    parietal [@Maisch2000c character 17].

45. Parietal − dorsal view contribution to the supratemporal
    fenestra: (0) minor contribution to the anterior margin of the
    supratemporal fenestra (1) large, almost completely excluding the
    postfrontal from contact with the anterior edge of the supratemporal
    fenestra [modified from @Maxwell2012 character 14]. The original
    state zero − 'with no contribution to anterior edge of UTF \[upper
    temporal fenestra\], postfrontal excluded by frontal' − is excluded.

46. Parietal ridge: (0) absent (1) present [@Motani1999c character 17].

47. Parietal − occipital flange in posterior view: (0) present (1)
    absent [modified from @Maxwell2012 character 16]. This and the next
    character are modified for reductive coding.

48. Parietal − size of the occipital flange: (0) large (1) reduced
    [modified from @Maxwell2012 character 16].

49. Parietals − separation of anterior processes of the right and
    left: (0) narrow, forming parietal fork, and frontal dorsally
    visible along the pineal foramen (1) widely open, resulting in
    absence of clear fork [@Motani1999c character 19]. This character
    may be coded as inapplicable if the anterior processes of the
    parietals contact (character 50).

50. Parietals − contact between the anterior processes of the right and
    left: (0) present anteriorly, eliminating the frontal from the
    parietal foramen (1) absent [modified from @Motani1999c character
    19].

51. Parietals − anterior fork elevated: (0) absent (1) present
    [@Nicholls2001 character 10]. This character is coded as
    inapplicable if no anterior parietal fork is present (character 49).

52. Postparietals − additional bone separating the parietal and
    supratemporal: (0) absent (1) present [modified from @Thorne2011
    character 18]. Different interpretations of the skull of
    *Cymbospondylus petrinus* disagree on the presence of an additional
    interparietal bone [*sensu* @Maisch2004a] or paired postparietals
    [*sensu* @Frobisch2006]. Here, after @Thorne2011 [character 18] I
    follow Fröbisch *et al.*'s [-@Frobisch2006] interpretation, but
    separate the presence of these extra bones.

53. Parietal − size of the supratemporal process: (0) short (1) long
    [modified from @Thorne2011 character 18]. This character is modified
    for reductive coding.

54. Parietal foramen − anteroposterior position: (0) approximately equal
    to the anterior edge of the supratemporal fenestra (1) well anterior
    to the anterior edge of the supratemporal fenestra [@Maxwell2012
    character 15].

55. Postfrontal − size of the posterior flange: (0) delicate and narrow,
    not extending ventrally to the posterior orbital rim (1) robust and
    triangular, approaching posterior orbital rim [@Druckenmiller2010
    character 12]. The posterior flange on the postfrontal is found in
    all ichthyosaurs [@Motani1999c; @Thorne2011], but the size of this
    varies [@Druckenmiller2010].

56. Postfrontal-postorbital − size of contact: (0) narrow (1) broad
    [@Roberts2014 character 16].

57. Postfrontal-supratemporal − contact: (0) absent (1) present
    [@Sander2000 character 28]. This is exclusive of character 55 as
    contact between the postfrontal and supratemporal may be made
    whether the posterior flange is large or small.

58. Postorbital − shape: (0) triradiate (1) lunate, without posterior
    process [@Motani1999c character 11].

59. Postorbital − size: (0) broad (1) narrow [@Fernandez2007 character
    7].

60. Postorbital − participates in the supratemporal fenestra: (0)
    present (1) absent [@Motani1999c character 12].

61. Postorbital-supratemporal − contact in external view: (0)
    present (1) absent [@Maxwell2012 character 6].

62. Supratemporal − enlargement: (0) small, minimal posterior
    exposure (1) moderate, forming posterior border of the supratemporal
    fenestra (2) strongly enlarged, forms significant portion of the
    posterior and lateral borders to supratemporal fenestra and skull
    roof [modified from @Sander2000 character 26]. The definitions for
    'small' and 'enlarged' are clarified.

63. Supratemporal − anterodorsal sheet overhanging the supratemporal
    fenestra: (0) absent (1) present [@Maisch2000c character 25].

64. Supratemporal − size of the descending ramus: (0) pronounced,
    reaching at least half of the total height of the quadrate (1)
    reduced, a small process medial to the quadrate articulation
    [@Maxwell2012 character 17].

65. Supratemporal-stapes − contact: (0) absent (1) present
    [@Fischer2013a character 52].

66. Sagittal eminence: (0) present (1) absent [@Fischer2011c character
    13].

67. Postparietal shelf: (0) absent (1) present [modified from
    @Nicholls2001 character 8]. This and the next character are
    separated for reductive coding.

68. Postparietal shelf − size and orientation: (0) small and oblique (1)
    large and horizontal [modified from @Nicholls2001 character 8].

69. \*Squamosal: (0) present (1) absent. This character is added, and
    characters 70−72 modified, and which may be coded as inapplicable,
    for reductive coding.

70. Squamosal − shape: (0) triangular (1) squared [@Fischer2011c
    character 16].

71. Squamosal − posterior descending process: (0) absent (1) present
    [modified from @Fernandez2007 character 4]. The absence of the
    squamosal is coded separately (character 69).

72. Squamosal − participates in supratemporal fenestra: (0) present (1)
    excluded by supratemporal and/or postfrontal [@Nicholls2001
    character 6].

73. Supratemporal fenestrae − width in dorsal aspect: (0) posterior half
    narrower than anterior half (1) anterior and posterior halves
    approximately equal in width [@Druckenmiller2010 character 11].

74. Anterior terrace of the supratemporal fenestra: (0) absent (1)
    present [modified from @Motani1999c character 14]. This character,
    and the next, has been modified for reductive coding.

75. Anterior terrace of the supratemporal fenestra − extent: (0) small,
    reaching the posterior part of the frontal anteriorly (1) large,
    reaching the nasal anteriorly [modified from @Motani1999c character
    14]. See character 74.

76. Skull roof − posterior margin indented in dorsal view: (0) deep (1)
    moderate [@Maisch2000c character 27].

77. Quadratojugal − location of the main body: (0) laterally (1)
    posteriorly [@Maisch2000c character 28].

78. Quadratojugal − exposure: (0) broad in lateral view (1) narrow and
    most extensively exposed in posterior view [@Maxwell2012 character
    8].

79. Quadratojugal − shape of the ventral edge: (0) concave (1) ventral
    edge straight or entirely covered by the jugal [@Maxwell2012
    character 9]. See also character 34.

80. Quadratojugal − distinctly offset quadrate process: (0) present (1)
    absent [@Maisch2000c character 29].

81. Quadrate − dorsal articulation location: (0) enclosed laterally by
    the squamosal (1) articulates dorsomedially with the supratemporal
    only [@Maxwell2012 character 11]. This character may be coded as
    inapplicable if the squamosal is absent (character 69).

82. Quadrate − location of the stapedial facet on the posterior
    surface: (0) ventral half (1) dorsal half [@Druckenmiller2010
    character 21].

83. Orbit − shape of the anterior margin: (0) irregular (1) regularly
    rounded (2) angled [modified from @Maisch2000c character 23]. The
    additional state 'angled' is added.

84. Postorbital skull − length compared to orbital diameter: (0) \> 
    1/3 (1) \<  1/3 [@Jiang2005a character 7].

85. Cheek − orientation: (0) mostly lateral (1) largely posterior
    [@Motani1999c character 25].

86. Interpterygoidal vacuity: (0) present (1) absent [modified from
    @Motani1999c character 27]. Other characters referring to a 'closed
    palate' [@Jiang2005a character 12] and exposure of the *basis
    cranii* [@Maisch2000c character 44] are included within this. This
    character is modified into a simple presence/absence dichotomy.

87. Palatine − contributes to subtemporal fenestra: (0) posteriorly
    forms anterior edge (1) posteriorly excluded from the subtemporal
    fenestra [@Maxwell2012 character 25].

88. Pterygoid − transverse flange: (0) well-developed (1) poorly
    developed [modified from @Motani1999c character 26]. The development
    and direction of the transverse flange of the pterygoid are
    separated for reductive coding (characters 88, 89).

89. Pterygoid − orientation of the transverse flange: (0)
    anterolateral (1) posterolateral [modified from @Motani1999c
    character 26]. See character 88.

90. Pterygoid − posteromedial process: (0) present (1) absent
    [@Maisch2000c character 35].

91. Vomer − number of dorsal processes: (0) one (1) two
    [@Druckenmiller2010 character 17]. The vomer, particularly dorsally,
    is poorly known; while this character is included, its coding
    completeness is low.

92. \*Epipterygoid − ossified: (0) present (1) absent. Presence of an
    ossified epipterygoid has been shown where there are well preserved
    internal skulls [@Woodward1886; @McGowan1973], and there is good
    evidence that this is not present in all taxa [@Kirton1983].

93. *Basis cranii* − largely formed by: (0) parasphenoid (1)
    basisphenoid [@Maisch2000c character 41].

94. Basioccipital − shape of the condyle: (0) flat or slightly
    concave (1) hemispherical [@Motani1999c character 31].

95. \*Basioccipital − notochordal pit on the condylar surface: (0)
    absent (1) present. See character 96.

96. \*Basioccipital − location of notochordal pit on the condylar
    surface: (0) central (1) dorsal. This character, and the previous,
    shows separation particularly within the Ophthalmosauridae; not all
    taxa show the pit on the basioccipital.

97. Basioccipital peg: (0) present (1) absent [@Fischer2011c character
    20].

98. Basioccipital − prominent ventral tubers separated by a deep
    notch: (0) present (1) absent [modified from @Maxwell2012 character
    24]. This character has been simplified to presence/absence.

99. \*Basioccipital − extracondylar area: (0) present (1) absent. This
    character is added as, in some taxa, the extracondylar area may be
    entirely lost. This is incorporated into @Fischer2013a [character
    20].

100. Basioccipital − size of the ventral extracondylar area: (0) larger
     than the dorsoventral height of the condyle (1) smaller than the
     condyle but still extensive (2) reduced to a thin strip
     [@Maxwell2012 character 23]. This is similar to @Fischer2013a
     [character 20]. This character is treated as ordered.

101. Basioccipital − contribution to the floor of the *foramen
     magnum*: (0) absent, excluded by the exoccipitals (1) present, the
     portion contributing being flat, or concave, and covered in
     finished bone [@Maxwell2012 character 21].

102. Basipterygoid − processes shape: (0) short, giving the
     basipterygoid a square outline in dorsal view (1) markedly expanded
     laterally, being wing-like, giving the basisphenoid a marked
     pentagonal shape in dorsal view [@Fischer2011c character 18].

103. Carotid foramen − pairing: (0) paired (1) unpaired [modified from
     @Maisch2000c character 42; after @Maxwell2010 character 10]. These
     two characters are joined, as they are slightly different versions
     of each other. They are also separated into characters 103, 104,
     and 107 for reductive coding.

104. Carotid foramen − location: (0) parabasisphenoid (1) basioccipital
     [modified from @Maisch2000c character 42; after @Maxwell2010
     character 10].

105. Parasphenoid − shape of the base of the cultriform process: (0)
     wide, gently grading into the basal plate (1) distinctly narrowed,
     well offset from the basal plate [@Maisch2000c character 43].

106. Parabasisphenoid − shape in ventral view: (0) gradually narrowing
     posterior to the basipterygoid processes (1) rapidly tapering
     posteriorly [@Maxwell2010 character 11].

107. Parabasisphenoid − location of the carotid foramen/foramina: (0)
     ventral surface (1) posterior surface [modified from @Maisch2000c
     character 42; after @Maxwell2010 character 10]. See characters 103
     and 104.

108. Opisthotic − shape of the paraoccipital process: (0) short and
     robust (1) elongate and slender [@Fischer2012 character 20].

109. Supraoccipital − orientation of the exoccipital processes: (0)
     parallel (1) divergent [@Maxwell2012 character 19].

110. Exoccipital − contribution to *foramen magnum*: (0) exoccipitals
     make up the largest lateral contribution (1) supraoccipital
     contribution almost equal to that of exoccipitals [@Maxwell2012
     character 20].

111. Stapes − size of the proximal head: (0) slender, much smaller than
     opisthotic proximal head (1) massive, as large or larger than
     opisthotic [@Fischer2011c character 21].

112. Stapes − relative size of heads: (0) lateral head less robust than
     the medial head (1) both medial and lateral heads robust
     [@Maxwell2012 character 18].

113. Stapes − size of shaft in adults: (0) thick (1) slender and gracile
     [@Roberts2014 characters 25].

114. Lower jaw: (0) well developed (1) reduced relative to lower jaw
     [@Maxwell2012 character 26].

115. Lower jaw − development: (0) normal (1) slender, reduced in
     diameter [@Sander2011 character 108]. Sander *et al.*'s
     [-@Sander2011] analysis coded this as state one only for
     *Shastasaurus*. However, there appears little difference between
     the apparent slenderness of the jaws in this taxon, and in some
     post-Triassic ichthyosaurs.

116. Lower jaw − dorsal margin in lateral view: (0) straight, or nearly
     so (1) markedly concave approximately ventral to the external nares
     [modified from @Sander2000 character 37].

117. Dentary − labial shelf: (0) absent (1) present [@Jiang2006
     character 14].

118. Surangular − makes up most of the posterior lateral surface of the
     lower jaw: (0) absent (1) present [@Maisch2000c character 38].

119. Surangular − dorsal (paracoronoid) process just anterior to the jaw
     articulation: (0) absent (1) present [@Sander2000 character 42].

120. Angular − extent of anterior lateral exposure: (0) much smaller
     than the surangular's exposure (1) extensive, at least as high and
     anteriorly as the surangular's exposure [modified from @Motani1999c
     character 32; after @Fischer2011c character 22; and @Maxwell2012
     character 28]. The coding is inverted from @Motani1999c after
     @Fischer2011c.

121. Angular − extent of posterior lateral exposure: (0) minimal, covers
     less than half of the lateral surface of the retroarticular
     process (1) extensive, surangular exposure reduced to a thin strip
     on the lateral surface of the retroarticular process [@Maxwell2012
     character 29].

122. Splenial − participation in the mandibular symphysis: (0) more
     extensive than the dentary (1) present but restricted to the
     posterior half [@Maxwell2012 character 27].

123. Coronoid − ossified: (0) present (1) absent [modified from
     @Maisch2000c character 45]. This character is separated for
     reductive coding (see character 124).

124. Coronoid − shape: (0) laterally flattened (1) narrow and elongate
     [modified from @Maisch2000c character 45]. May be coded as
     inapplicable if the coronoid is not present/ossified (character
     123).

125. Coronoid process: (0) flat (1) elevated (2) drawn into a pointed
     process [modified from @Sander2000 character 41]. This refers to
     the true process on the coronoid, so may be coded as inapplicable
     if this is not present/ossified (character 120).

126. Lower jaw glenoid − deeply excavated: (0) absent (1) present
     [@Sander2000 character 43].

127. Articular − transverse width: (0) wide with dorsally deeply concave
     retroarticular process (1) narrow [@Maisch2000c character 47].

128. Teeth: (0) present (1) absent [modified from @Maisch2000c character
     4; after @Fischer2011c character 4; and @Sander2011 character 109].
     The presence/absence of teeth is separated for reductive coding
     alongside character 126; subsequent dentition characters may become
     inapplicable in this case.

129. Dentition − complete, well-developed dentition retained in
     adults: (0) present (1) strongly reduced [modified from
     @Maisch2000c character 4; after @Fischer2011c character 4; and
     @Sander2011 character 109]. This character is separated from
     edentulism as it refers to the size and number of teeth (character
     128).

130. Dentition − tooth implantation after @Motani1997a: (0)
     subthecodont (1) thecodont (2) aulacodont [modified from
     @Sander2000 character 52]. Here, ankylosed and ichthyosaurian
     thecodonty are separated into separate characters (character 131).

131. Dentition − bony fixation: (0) present (1) absent [@Motani1999c
     character 43].

132. Plicidentine: (0) absent (1) present [@Motani1999c character 36].

133. Dentition − number of tooth rows: (0) one (1) two (2) irregular
     pavement [@Sander2000 character 50].

134. Upper dental groove: (0) present (1) absent [modified from
     @Motani1999c character 41]. Motani's [-@Motani1999c] characters 41
     and 42 have each been separated to form characters 134−137 by
     reductive coding. These are not excluded by edentulism (character
     128): the dental groove may be retained.

135. Upper dental groove − location: (0) throughout jaw margin (1) only
     anteriorly [modified from @Motani1999c character 41]. This
     character may be inapplicable if the upper dental groove is absent
     (character 134).

136. Lower dental groove: (0) present (1) absent [modified from
     @Motani1999c character 42]. See character 134.

137. Lower dental groove − location: (0) throughout jaw margin (1) only
     anteriorly [modified from @Motani1999c character 42]. This
     character may be inapplicable if the lower dental groove is absent
     (character 136).

138. Dentition − number of maxillary positions ventral to the jugal: (0)
     less than three (1) four or more [@Druckenmiller2010 character 16].

139. \*Palatine teeth: (0) present (1) absent.

140. Pterygoidal teeth: (0) present (1) absent [@Motani1999c character
     44].

141. Dentition − replacement: (0) irregular (1) regular [@Sander2000
     character 51].

142. Dentition − position of replacement teeth to the pulp cavity of the
     predecessor: (0) outside (1) inside [@Motani1999c character 35].

143. Dentition − ornamentation of the enamel: (0) prominent ridges and
     grooves (1) thin and smooth (2) thick and bumpy [@Maxwell2012
     character 30].

144. Dentition − shape of the root cross-section in adults: (0)
     rounded (1) quadrangular [modified from @Fischer2011c character
     3; after @Fischer2012 character 3].

145. Dentition − striations on the root: (0) present (1) absent
     [modified from @Fischer2013a character 4]. This and the next
     character have been separated from the single original character
     for reductive coding.

146. Dentition − definition of root striations: (0) clear (1) subtle
     [modified from @Fischer2013a character 4].

147. Dentition − definition of the base of the enamel layer: (0) poorly
     defined or invisible (1) well defined and precise [@Fischer2011c
     character 2].

148. Dentition − horizontal section of the tooth crown: (0) circular (1)
     mediodistally compressed (2) laterally compressed [modified from
     @Motani1999c character 37]. This has been restricted to the tooth
     crown only.

149. Dentition − shape of the posterior tooth crown: (0) conical (1)
     rounded (2) flat [@Motani1999c character 39].

### Axial skeleton

In the axial skeleton, the usual regional divisions are used: presacral
and caudal, with the presacral region divided into 'cervical' and
dorsal. This is discussed more in
[\[OicenicusVertebralcolumn\]](#OicenicusVertebralcolumn){reference-type="ref"
reference="OicenicusVertebralcolumn"}.

1.  Atlas pleurocentrum − shape: (0) anteriorly convex (1) deeply
    concave [@Maisch2000c character 49].

2.  Atlas-axis: (0) separate (1) co-ossified in adults [@Maisch2000c
    character 50].

3.  Atlas-axis − neural spines: (0) completely overlapping, may be
    fused (1) functionally separate, never fused [@Druckenmiller2010
    character 26].

4.  Presacral vertebrae − number: (0) n \< 30 (1) 30 ≤ n \< 55 (2)
    55 ≤ n [modified from @Motani1999c character 95]. This has been
    modified to include all vertebrae between 30 and 55 in state one.

5.  Central facets: (0) bulging (1) central face straight-sided
    [modified from @Sander2000 character 58]. Amphicoely has been
    excluded from Sander's [-@Sander2000] original character.

6.  'Cervical' vertebrae − diapophysis-neural arch contact extent: (0)
    up to middle dorsal region (1) anterior dorsal region [@Fischer2011c
    character 23].

7.  'Cervical' vertebrae − centrum to neural arch height: (0) \< 2 (1)
    ≥ 2 [modified from @Sander2000 character 61]. This has been
    simplified to a dichotomy.

8.  'Cervical' centra − bicipital rib facet: (0) absent (1) present
    [@Motani1999c character 99].

9.  Postcervical centra − number of rib articulations: (0) holocephalous
    throughout (1) dicephalous in posterior dorsal and anterior caudal
    region, remainder holocephalous (2) dicephalous throughout
    [@Nicholls2001 character 38].

10. Dorsal centra − increase in height from anterior to posterior: (0)
    absent (1) present [@Sander2000 character 55].

11. Anterior dorsal neural spine − shape: (0) normal (1) narrow, high
    and straight [@Motani1999c character 102].

12. Anterior dorsal/thoracic zygapophyses − pairing: (0) paired (1)
    bilobate (2) unpaired [modified from @Maisch2000c character 51]. The
    additional state 'bilobate' is added to separate when the two
    zygapophyses meet medially.

13. Anterodorsal centra − rib facet position: (0) confluent with
    anterior face in at least some centra (1) not confluent in any
    [@Motani1999c character 101].

14. Anterodorsal centra − synapophysis shape: (0) symmetrical,
    hourglass-shaped (1) asymmetrical with irregular swellings and
    constrictions [modified from @Nicholls2001 character 40].
    Dicephalous is removed as this is coded in character 158.

15. Posterior dorsal centra − outline: (0) ≤ 3.5× high as long (1) ≥ 4×
    high as long [@Fischer2011c character 24]. These codings are the
    reverse of @Maxwell2010 [character 15], but direction is defined by
    the outgroup to the clade where the state changes.

16. Sacrum: (0) present (1) absent, no firm attachment of pelvic girdle
    by suture between sacral ribs and ilium [@Sander2000 character 56].

17. Sacral ribs: (0) two, distinguishable (1) not distinguishable
    [@Motani1999c character 104]. Is inapplicable when sacrum is
    absent/undifferentiated (character 165).

18. Tail − length relative to precaudal body: (0) longer (1) shorter
    [@Maisch2000c character 65; @Fischer2013a character 33].

19. Tail − lunate tail fin: (0) none (1) well-developed [@Maisch2000c
    character 66].

20. Caudal peak: (0) absent (1) present [@Motani1999c character 96].
    This character is separate from character 168: the caudal peak is
    interpreted as an early modification of the tail to an aquatic
    lifestyle, with development of a tail fin
    [@Motani1999c; @McGowan2003]. Only in later ichthyosaurs was this
    greatly developed into a strongly asymmetrical, crescentic form.

21. Caudal centra − mid-region height change: (0) gradual decrease (1)
    increase (2) sudden decrease [@Motani1999c character 98].

22. Caudal centra − elongation: (0) elongate (1) short [@Maisch2000c
    character 59].

23. Anterior caudal vertebrae − neural arch to centrum height: (0)
    \< 2 (1) ≥ 2 [modified from @Sander2000 character 63].

24. Anterior to middle caudal centra − spinous process shape: (0) very
    long and slender (1) short and wide [@Maisch2000c character 61].

25. Middle caudal centra − neural spine inclination: (0) distinctly
    anterior (1) vertical or posterior [@Maisch2000c character 60].

26. Tail fin centra − shape: (0) strongly laterally compressed (1) as
    wide as high [@Maxwell2010 character 16].

27. Haemapophyses − ossified: (0) present (1) absent [@Maisch2000c
    character 63].

28. Chevrons − in apical region: (0) present (1) absent [@Fischer2011c
    character 27].

29. Rib − cross-sectional shape at mid-shaft: (0) oval or with posterior
    groove (1) figure-of-eight (2) round (3) with anterior and posterior
    flanges [modified from @Sander2000 character 73]. State three is
    added to code for the outgroup *Hupehsuchus nanchangensis*.

30. Gastralia: (0) present (1) absent [modified from @Motani1999c
    character 105; @Sander2000 character 75]. The character and the next
    are combined then separated for reductive coding.

31. Gastralia − V-shaped element and arrangement: (0) present with one
    lateral element per side (1) present with two lateral elements
    [modified from @Sander2000 character 75].

### Appendicular skeleton

1.  Interclavicle − shape: (0) cruciform (1) triangular (1)
    [T]{.sans-serif}-shaped [@Motani1999c character 45].

2.  Clavicle − expanded medial flange: (0) present (1) absent, clavicle
    slender and narrow medially [@Maisch2000c character 68].

3.  Coracoid − shape: (0) mediolaterally wider than anteroposteriorly
    long (1) approximately equidimensional (2) anteroposteriorly longer
    than mediolaterally wide [@Maxwell2012 character 32].

4.  Coracoid − medial margin: (0) well-rounded (1) straight symphysis
    [@Maisch2000c character 73].

5.  Coracoid − anterior notch: (0) present (1) absent [modified from
    @Maxwell2012 character 33]. Characters 185 and 185 have been
    simplified to presence/absence.

6.  Coracoid − posterior notch: (0) present (1) absent [modified from
    @Maxwell2012 character 34]. See character 185.

7.  Coracoid − lengths of anterior and posterior extensions: (0)
    anterior extension longer than posterior (1) reduced anterior
    extension [@Maisch2000c character 74].

8.  Coracoid − anteromedial process: (0) present (1) absent
    [@Fischer2011c character 29].

9.  Coracoid − glenoid and scapular facet sizes: (0) very small (1)
    enlarged [@Maisch2000c character 72].

10. Coracoid − medial facet for the scapula: (0) absent (1) present
    [@Arkhangelsky2014 character 52].

11. Scapula − prominent acromion process: (0) present (1) absent
    [modified from @Maxwell2012 character 31]. Maxwell *et al.*'s
    [-@Maxwell2012] character is modified to presence/absence of
    acromion process, with anterior expansion (states 1 and 2) separated
    into character 192.

12. Scapula − anterior expansion proximally \[*in lieu* of acromion
    process\]: (0) present (1) absent [modified from @Maxwell2012
    character 31]. This has been separated as a different character from
    the acromion process following reductive coding methods.

13. Scapula − shape of the anterodorsal margin: (0) fan-shaped (1)
    emarginated (2) straight [@Motani1999c character 46].

14. Scapula − size of the glenoid contribution: (0) at least as large as
    the coracoid facet (1) markedly smaller than the coracoid facet
    [@Fischer2012 character 27].

15. Scapula − posterior process: (0) distinct and large (1) reduced
    [@Maisch2000c character 71].

16. Scapula − blade shaft: (0) absent (1) present at least proximally
    [@Motani1999c character 47].

17. Scapula − angle subtended by the axis and glenoid facet: (0) nearly
    parallel (1) 60° or more [@Motani1999c character 48].

18. Humerus − differentiated and offset proximal head: (0) present (1)
    absent [@Maisch2000c character 75].

19. Humerus − anterior margin: (0) straight, convex (1) with small
    central notch (2) markedly concave [modified from @Maisch2000c
    character 77]. The character and state assignments in various
    elements of the fore- and hindlimbs call for differentiation between
    having a concave 'shaft' [*sensu* @Motani1999c] and a straight or
    convex rounded margin (absence of 'shaft'). The straight margin may
    or may not be notched. @McGowan2003 [56] state "these notches may or
    may not be homologous to the plesiomorphic shafts of phalanges and
    metacarpals". Contrasting views are based on ontogeny
    [@Caldwell1997] or phylogeny [@Motani1999c]. In these cases, the
    notch will be treated as a constriction of the shaft; this version
    is found in all recent phylogenies (although these are notably based
    upon [@Motani1999c]). See also characters 223, 275, 276, and 280.

20. Humerus − anterior flange: (0) absent (1) present [modified from
    @Motani1999c character 53]. This character and the next have been
    separated following reductive coding methods.

21. Humerus − anterior flange size: (0) large, complete (1) reduced
    proximally [modified from @Motani1999c character 53]. See
    character 200. The anterior flange of the humerus is a broad process
    that extends the length of the humerus in the earlier ichthyosaurs,
    continuing anterior to main shaft of the humerus; in later
    ichthyosaurs, the size of this flange is reduced proximally or lost
    entirely. Motani's [-@Motani1999c character 53] is modified from
    Callaway's [-@Callaway1989a character 29], which include the loss of
    the "anterior blade \[= flange\]" as state 2.

22. Humerus − relative width exclusive of anterior flange: (0) much
    proximodistally longer than anteroposteriorly wide (1) approximately
    equidimensional [@Motani1999c character 54].

23. Humerus − dorsal trochanter: (0) none or incipient (1)
    well-developed [@Maisch2000c character 78].

24. Humerus − protruding deltopectoral crest: (0) absent (1) present
    [modified from @Fischer2011c character 31; after @Fischer2013a
    character 39]. This and the next characters combine two characters,
    then split them following reductive coding. The original character
    [@Fischer2013a character 39] was ordered, as are these here. This
    character is treated as ordered.

25. Humerus − development of protruding deltopectoral crest: (0)
    normal (1) large, matching the dorsal trochanter in height, and
    bordered by concave areas [modified from @Fischer2011c character
    31; after @Fischer2013a character 39]. This character is treated as
    ordered. See character 204.

26. Humerus − relative anteroposterior width in dorsal view, excluding
    dorsal and ventral processes: (0) distal end wider than proximal (1)
    approximately equal or proximal end wider than distal [@Fischer2011c
    character 32].

27. Humerus − plate-like dorsal ridge: (0) absent (1) present
    [@Druckenmiller2010 character 31].

28. Humerus − position of distal facets: (0) not terminal (1) terminal
    [modified from @Motani1999c character 52]. This character and the
    next are separated from a single original character for reductive
    coding methods.

29. Humerus − relative size of radial and ulnar facets: (0) radial facet
    is larger than the ulnar facet (1) radial and ulnar facets
    approximately equal size [modified from @Motani1999c character 52].
    See character 208.

30. Humerus − separation of radial and ulnar facets: (0) continuous (1)
    separated by notch [@Maxwell2012 character 36].

31. Humerus − ulnar facet deflected posterodistally, distal facing
    radial facet: (0) absent (1) present [@Fischer2012 character 34]. As
    noted by @Fischer2012, "distal facing radial facet" must be included
    to separate the intended non-platypterygiine ophthalmosaurids from
    the non-homologous state in taxa where the intermedium contacts the
    humerus.

32. Humerus − tuberosity at the anterodistal extremity: (0) present (1)
    absent, acute angle [@Fischer2013a character 44].

33. Humerus − anterodistal facet for sesamoid: (0) absent (1) present
    [@Motani1999c character 57].

34. Humerus − posterodistal facet for sesamoid: (0) absent (1) present
    [@Druckenmiller2010 character 36].

35. Humerus-intermedium − contact: (0) absent (1) present
    [@Fernandez2007 character 16].

36. Forelimb − epipodial and metapodial shape: (0) fattened and
    plate-like (1) strongly thickened [@Maisch2000c character 94].

37. Forelimb − notching of anterior face on leading edge elements \[in
    adults\]: (0) present (1) absent [@Fischer2011c character 37].

38. \*Forelimb − notching of posterior face on trailing edge elements
    \[in adults\]: (0) absent (1) present. This character is ordered.

39. Forelimb − number of postaxial 'complete' accessory digits: (0)
    none (1) one (2) two or more [@Fischer2011c character 38]. This
    character is treated as ordered.

40. Epipodials − relative size of anterior and posterior element: (0)
    radius/tibia much larger than ulna/fibula (1) equal in size
    [modified from @Nicholls2001 character 24]. The states are reversed.

41. Epipodials − interosseous space between ulna and radius: (0)
    present (1) small foramen (2) absent [@Sander2000 character 87].
    Sander's [-@Sander2000] character combines Motani's [-@Motani1999c]
    characters 60 and 63. When the intermedium intervenes between the
    radius and the ulna, this character is inapplicable.

42. Radius − proximodistal length to anteroposterior width: (0) longer
    than wide (1) wider than long [@Motani1999c character 61].

43. Ulna − posterior margin: (0) concave (1) notched (2) straight or
    convex [modified from @Motani1999c character 62]. See character 198.

44. Ulna − anteroposterior width: (0) proximal end narrower than
    distal (1) about equal widths [@Maisch2000c character 87].

45. Ulna − shape of the posterior surface: (0) rounded or straight and
    nearly as thick as the rest of the element (1) concave with a thin,
    blade-like margin [@Fischer2012 character 36; @Fischer2013a
    character 45].

46. Manual pisiform: (0) present (1) absent [@Motani1999c character 67].

47. Manual pisiform 2 (neomorph): (0) absent (1) present [@Jiang2006
    character 20].

48. Intermedium: (0) present (1) absent [modified from @Motani1999c
    character 66]. This and the next character are split following
    reductive coding.

49. Intermedium-ulnare − relative size: (0) ulnare larger than
    intermedium (1) ulnare smaller than intermedium [modified from
    @Motani1999c character 66]. See character 227.

50. Intermedium − location: (0) distal to the ulna (1) between radius
    and ulna [modified from @Fernandez2007 character 19]. Polarity is
    reversed from the original.

51. Intermedium − shape: (0) as wide or wider than long (1) longer than
    wide [modified from @Jiang2006 character 22]. This and the next
    character are modified for reductive coding, and to incorporate the
    condition found in *Brachypterygius extremus*.

52. Intermedium − proximal shape: (0) straight or notched (1) pointed
    [modified from @Jiang2006 character 22].

53. Intermedium − distal edge shape: (0) angular (1) flattened
    [@Maxwell2010 character 27].

54. Intermedium − number of digits directly supported: (0) one (1)
    two (2) three [modified from @Fischer2011c character 40]. The
    addition state is added where the intermedium supports three digits.

55. Intermedium − size of distal facets: (0) subequal (1) one much
    larger than the other(s) [modified from @Maxwell2012 characters 43].
    This is modified slightly to incorporate a more general comparison.

56. Ulnare − number of distal facets: (0) one, primarily supporting a
    single digit (1) two, with a posteriorly oriented facet for
    articulation with metacarpal V [@Maxwell2012 character 44].

57. Distal carpal − number: (0) five (1) four (2) three (3) two
    [modified from @Sander2000 character 92]. This refers only to 'true'
    distal carpals, and not accessory elements in the distal carpal row
    [after @Motani1999]. @Motani1999c included, for example,
    *Caypullisaurus bonapartei* with six or seven distal carpals,
    however, this is reflected more generally by polydactyly (character
    235).

58. Distal carpal 1-metacarpal V − relative size: (0) much smaller (1)
    similar size or larger [modified from @Maisch2000c character 95].
    This may be coded as inapplicable if either element is not present.
    Although Maisch and Matzke's [-@Maisch2000c] original character
    refers to the relative size of distal carpals I and V, their
    discussion of this (p. 50) makes it clear that the character should
    actually refer to distal carpal I and metacarpal 5; this has been
    corrected here.

59. Distal carpals 2−3-distal carpal 5 − relative size: (0) much
    smaller (1) of comparable size [@Maisch2000c character 96].

60. Distal carpal 4-metacarpal V − relative size: (0) much smaller (1)
    smaller [@Maisch2000c character 100].

61. Manual digits − number of ossified elements in the metacarpal
    row: (0) four or fewer (1) five or more [@Maxwell2012 character 45].

62. Manual preaxial accessory digit: (0) absent (1) present
    [@Fischer2011c character 39]. @Fischer2011c modified this character
    from Motani's [-@Motani1999c] characters 75 and 76 following the
    reappraisal of the forelimb of *Caypullisaurus bonapartei* by
    @Fernandez2001.

63. Manual digit V reduction: (0) none (1) reduced to small floating
    elements [modified from @Fischer2013a character 55]. The absence of
    digit five is removed from this character as it is coded by the loss
    of metacarpal V (character 246).

64. Manual metacarpal I: (0) present (1) absent [modified from
    @Motani1999c character 68]. This character is reduced from the
    original to simply presence/absence.

65. Manual metacarpal I − shape: (0) elongate (1) semilunate or rounded
    [modified from @Maisch2000c character 97]. The definition of state 1
    has been changed from "cylindrical" to "elongate".

66. Manual metacarpals II−IV − shape: (0) elongate cylinder (1) rounded
    [@Maisch2000c character 98].

67. Manual metacarpal V: (0) present (1) absent [modified from
    @Maisch2000c character 99]. Presence and absence has been separated
    from the shape (character 247).

68. Manual metacarpal V − posterior margin: (0) convex (1) straight or
    concave [modified from @Maisch2000c character 99].

69. Manual phalanges − maximum number in a single digit: (0) five or
    less (1) six or more [modified from @Motani1999c character 77]. This
    character is modified based on what is considered the plesiomorphic
    condition for diapsids: up to five phalanges in a single digit
    (digit 4), as exemplified by *Petrolacosaurus*
    [@Reisz1977; @Reisz1981]. Thus, six or more phalanges mark
    hyperphalangy [@Maisch2000c character 125; @Sander2000 characters 98
    & 114].

70. Proximal manual phalanges − shape: (0) elongate or
    hourglass-shaped (1) mostly rounded (2) tightly packed
    rectangles/polygons [modified from @Maisch2000c character 102; after
    @Fischer2011c character 42]. @Fischer2011c separated rounded and
    rectangular from Maisch & Matzke's [-@Maisch2000c] original
    character.

71. Distal manual phalanges − shape: (0) elongate (1) rounded
    [@Maisch2000c character 101].

72. Manual digital bifurcation: (0) absent (1) present in at least some
    individuals [modified from @Fischer2011c character 43]. This
    character is modified to be less specific and cover greater
    intraspecific variation.

73. Pelvic girdle − size: (0) normal-sized (1) moderately reduced (2)
    strongly reduced [@Sander2000 character 103]. This character may be
    separated into two characters: (1) pelvis normal-sized or reduced,
    and (2) pelvis reduction moderate or strong. However, as this
    appears to be a continuation of the same feature − ichthyosaurs
    tended to reduce the pelvis through time − it is retained as a
    single character.

74. Ilium − blade shape: (0) with thick shaft (1) plate-like (2) narrow
    and styloidal [@Motani1999c character 80].

75. Ilium − anteromedial prominence: (0) present (1) absent
    [@Motani1999c character 81].

76. Ischium-pubis − medial fusion: (0) absent (1) present [modified from
    @Maxwell2012 character 50]. The polarity of characters 255 and 256
    are reversed from their originals.

77. Ischium-pubis − lateral fusion: (0) absent (1) present [modified
    from @Maxwell2012 character 51]. See character 255.

78. Ischium and pubis − meet medially in well defined symphysis: (0)
    present (1) strongly convex medial margins [@Maisch2000c character
    108].

79. Ischium and pubis − relative size: (0) pubis larger than ischium (1)
    similar size or ischium larger [@Maisch2000c character 107].

80. Ischium or ischiopubis − shape: (0) plate-like, flattened (1)
    rod-like [@Fischer2011c character 45].

81. Ischium − medial edge expansion: (0) great (1) little or none
    [@Maxwell2012 character 53].

82. Ischium − acetabular contribution: (0) greater than pubis (1)
    subequal with pubis [@Maxwell2012 character 52].

83. Pubis − obturator foramen: (0) present (1) absent [modified from
    @Motani1999c character 84]. The presence/absence of the obturator
    foramen and its position are separated.

84. Pubis − location of obturator foramen: (0) completely enclosed in
    pubis (1) mostly in pubis but open on one side (2) part of obturator
    fossa [@Thorne2011 character 84].

85. Pubis − distance between the obturator foramen\[/incisure\] and the
    distal margin: (0) large (1) small [modified from @Maisch2000c
    character 110]. Absence is excluded as it is coded in character 262.

86. Thyroid fenestra: (0) absent (1) present [modified from @Motani1999c
    character 82]. The original character is separated into characters
    265 and 266 following reductive codings methods.

87. Thyroid fenestra − openings: (0) one median opening (1) two,
    medially separated [modified from @Motani1999c character 82]. See
    character 265.

88. Femur − relative proximodistal length to anteroposterior width: (0)
    much (\> 2×) longer than wide (1) shorter and wider, with distinct
    medial constriction [@Sander2000 character 110].

89. Femur − prominent, ridge-like dorsal and ventral processes
    demarcated from the head and extending up to mid-shaft: (0)
    absent (1) present [@Fischer2011c character 46].

90. Femur − ventral process size relative to dorsal process: (0)
    smaller (1) same size or larger, more prominent [@Roberts2014
    character 52].

91. Femur − wide distal blade: (0) present (1) absent, subequal proximal
    and distal widths [@Fischer2013a character 61].

92. Femur − anterodistal facet for anterior accessory epipodial element
    anterior to the tibia: (0) absent (1) present [@Fischer2011c
    character 48].

93. Femur − tibial facet size relative to fibular facet: (0) larger (1)
    subequal [@Maisch2000c character 112].

94. Tibia − proximodistal length to anteroposterior width: (0) longer
    than wide (1) wider than long [@Motani1999c character 90].

95. Tibia − anterior margin: (0) concave (1) notched (2) straight or
    convex [modified from @Motani1999c character 92]. See character 198.

96. Tibia − posterior margin: (0) concave (1) notched (2) straight or
    convex [modified from @Motani1999c character 91]. See character 198.

97. Tibia − proximodistal length relative to more distal elements: (0)
    approximately twice as long (1) only slightly longer [@Maxwell2012
    character 55].

98. Tibia and fibula − relative size: (0) tibia larger than fibula (1)
    approximately equal (2) tibia proximodistally and anteroposteriorly
    smaller [@Maxwell2012 character 56].

99. Tibia and fibula − proximal contact: (0) absent (1) present
    [modified from @Motani1999c character 88; after @Maxwell2012
    character 57]. @Maxwell2012 reversed the states from Motani's
    [-@Motani1999c] original character.

100. Fibula − anterior margin: (0) concave (1) notched (2) straight or
     convex [modified from @Maxwell2012 character 59]. See
     character 198.

101. Fibula − position relative to femur: (0) not fixed, mobile relative
     to the femur (1) much posterior (2) about the same level
     [@Motani1999c character 93].

102. Astragalus − position: (0) between tibia and fibula (1) distal to
     tibia [@Druckenmiller2010 character 48].

103. Distal tarsals − number: (0) five (1) four (2) three [@Sander2000
     character 112].

104. Pedal digit 1: (0) present (1) absent [@Motani1999c character 89].

105. Hindlimb − notching on anterior of leading edge metapodials: (0)
     absent (1) present [@Maxwell2012 character 60].

106. \*Hindlimb − notching on posterior of trailing edge
     metapodials: (0) absent (1) present. This new character codes in a
     similar manner to characters 211, 212, and 279.

107. Pedal postaxial accessory digit: (0) absent (1) present
     [@Fischer2011c character 50].

108. Metatarsals − shape: (0) elongate or hourglass-shaped (1) shortened
     and rounded (2) polygonal [modified from @Maisch2000c character
     118]. Characters 287 and 288 are modified to incorporate polygonal
     metatarsals and pedal phalanges.

109. Pedal phalanges − shape: (0) elongate or hourglass-shaped (1)
     rounded (2) polygonal [modified from @Maisch2000c character 119].
     See character 287.

Taxon codings {#appB:Taxoncodes}
-------------

The following are taxon codings used in the analysis. These are included
in a NEXUS file on the accompanying disc.

``` {name="phylomatrix" style="phylomatrix" nolol="true"}
Acamptonectes_densus    0?????10?1???????001??1?1????????????1???????0??11????0??????20??????????????????0???????????11111021010??01?110001?0?1???1-1100?21101010??1??1101??011?111?11112?00???1??10???012????110110101-2011012110101111101110011?????2010???????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
Aegirosaurus_leptospondylus    10111?100?1-10111001???0?211100011111111010010??11?0?0001111120??10-000100-111????111????????????????????????????01101?00??????0021?01010?????0?01??0???1???01?0?0??1?11??1????01?0?2????????????????12110?100?11-0100111021-120?000111011012--111?1-200121122?11???1?1--0-1111011221112202100122
Arthropterygius_chrisorum    ?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????11001021110??1???????????????????1??????????????????????01??0??11???1?1??????1???1?1??????10??010???????1211111101100111001???12121???0?1011??????????????????????????????????011101????????????????
Athabascasaurus_bitumineus    00111?101101110?10001110?21111?0??101111?0-110??01?010111??1120?010-01?100-111??1?101????????1????01??????????1?????????1??????0?2??01010?????010110??1?1???11??????1????????????????1??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????22?11?????1--0-?111??????????????????
Barracudasauroides_panxianensis    ?1-0-?000100100?0?0?0-?100010000001010?????0???????0??010110011??0??0101?11??10???100????????????????????????????000?10001???0?000??010??0????0?00?01???1?0111?1???011?01???0???????202011010001000001010010-10100000000?0000021?010110012011?-110?0?000?0??12100000110000-1100000000011101011000
Besanosaurus_leptorhynchus    1000-?00?11-0?0?10110-?0?10???1010200000???01??????00??1??0??10??10-????????0000???0??????????????00?????????????0?00110011--1?011??0?????????1????00???2?0010110???1?001??010?0000??0100100100?0000011101?0-0?100000000001020210??01101110?2???0???????111?11000110??0110-100101?0000?00021??111
Brachypterygius_alekseevi    ??????1?111-??1???0????0?21?????????????????????????????????????????0?????????????????????????????0??110???????????????????????0?21?010??????????????11?1???1110?0-?11????1?1???????20110110101-21110121101111111000011110012121?000110001112--11101-1001211?????????????????????????????????????
Brachypterygius_extremus    ?0011?101?0?1010100?11?0?211110011101??0?0-????????0??01?11???????????????????????20?1???????11111021110?01??????0100111?????1100211010101??0?0?01?00????????????????????????????????????????0???????121101111111-0100111011-121?000110001012--111?1-1001(1 2)10?????????????????????????????????????
Brachypterygius_pseudoscythica    ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????0??????????????????????????????21???????????01??00?11??0??11???0-0??????1?????????21210111101-20110121101??1111-01001?1011-121?000110010-?2---11?1-11-1110?????????????????????????????????????
Californosaurus_perrini    ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????0?????????????????????????????????????????????????????1000100100?01100101??1?001????200110100001100121110??001000010000??10011?100100010-0?????0??????????12100110?10100-100010012001001???????
Callawayia_neoscapularis    01-1??1000000??0100?110?000?0?????1?10100111110001?0100011111101?11101?11101????0?10010??????1????00?????????????0100110011--1?0021101010011??0?00?00100100010111000110010101101100???0000101001201001110000-001000000000?100120?00001001101????00?1-1??111010100101??0100-010000012001021211?011
Cartorhynchus_lenticarpus    0?????010?000000000?0-???0?100010010001000-010???0?000010000110??10-0?01?0-0001?0??00????????????????????????????00001111??????1---------------------???0???????????0??????????0??0?00????????010?0??1?10000-001?00?0000???100?0???010011???????0?????????1?1??00?00???????10?10100001100??0????0
Caypullisaurus_bonapartei    01011?1?011?00111001???0011110001110?0?1???????????0??001101020??1??0101?0-11011??101????????1????01?????????1???00000111?1--??01???0????????????????11??0101111??-011????1????0??0?2?210?1?101-211101211011111110111001?02121210000110010112---11?1-21-111022??0??????????11110?0221212212100111
Chacaicosaurus_cayi    01-11?1????????????0?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????11111010????????????0???????????????????????????????????11??0????????????????????????????????????????????????????0?????0?01001121210000110101112---00-1-11-1110???????????????1011??????????????????
Chaohusaurus_chaoxianensis    00110??0?011?00100000-010001000?10101010?0-010??00??00?11000110??1??0110?0-00011??0111?00???00??0?????100?0??????00001100??????00???01010??1??1?1-?110?1100?01?000??100?10????0?1?0?1?0001????0-0?0?0101000??0010000000010000000010010011???2--010000001000010111110??01?1110-000000011011?000000
Chaohusaurus_geishanensis    ???????0?0??????0??????????1000110101???????????????0????00?1???????01??????00??????1????????????????????????????00?01100??????00???1?????????1?1-?110?1?0????????????0?????????1?????????????0-0?0?0101000??10100000000100000000100110111012--11000100100001???????????????0-00?????????1??0000?
Chaohusaurus_zhangjiawanensis    0000-??0??1??00?001?0-00000100????001001?0-010??10-000010?00010??10-01?000-0??????000??????????????????????0???????????????????0??0???????????0?????1???10??00000??000001?0?1???0000?0???????????????1210000-1010000000010000000?000110?11012--010?00001?0??10000?0000?????10?000000001000??00???
Contectopalatus_atavus    01-1000001001101010?0-01000110011010111000-0100001?001001111011100100101111000110?111001-0??0?0-??01?010??0????0101011?0??1--??0010100-??011111000001???1???????????1?00111?00?0100?1?210001000?0000010100?0-1010010000000010021?00011001211100010?0100010101???????????????00000??????02??011000
Cryopterygius_kristiansenae    01111?1001??101?1000?????2111?0011?011????????????????00110102??????????????101???210?????????????0{1 2}?????????????01001?01??????0021?010101????0????00?1?1??11110????111??21?11???10?21110110101-11110121101101110011000110?121210100110001112--10?0??1011110211101001?01-0-111101122111220?????11
Cymbospondylus_buchseri    0??????0????00??0???0-??0??10000??1?1000???001??11-1-0001001010??1???????10?????1?100????????????????????????????000?1100?1--0?00????1?10-????0????0?????00010110010?????????????101?01?11111000100111210000-0010000000010?00020?1000?001????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
Cymbospondylus_nichollsi    000???????00000?1?0?11?10?01000000101000111000??10-1-00001000011?0??0111010?00010?000111-0???0????0??011?0-??????00??0100?1--00??????????????????????00??00010??001??????????????1???020111110???????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
Cymbospondylus_petrinus    0000-10001001001000?0-0100?10000101010001100010010-1-0001101000-000-0111010000010?100101-0??000-?00110?????0?000100111000?1--000010101010?110?000000000?200010000010110010000100?100?00000011000110111210000-00100000000???000100???00001???????????????????10000010010110-00000000001101????????
Eurhinosaurus_longirostris    10111?10111-1001100???100111100111111001?0-1110111-0110011110200?11110??1101111???11111?????11???00111001?10000011000100011--0101211010100110?11000001111010111021-0110112101??0120?21210110101-211101211100-00110000000(0 1)01021210100011101102---00?1-21-121022001010110200-1000001221012212100021
Excalibosaurus_costini    10011?10101-00011000???00211000?111?1001???11?????????001111020??1???????10?111???111????????1???????????????????10001?00??????0121?010100??0?10??000????01011????-0111112101101120?21210110101-211101211100-10110000000011021210100110111102---0011-21-11102??00010?10210-1000000121212202110011
Grippia_longirostris    0000-?000000000100000-01000100000-00000000-010??10-000010000010??10-0??1010000010?000??000????0-??00?????????????00001100?1--??000?111010?11?100???00????0?????10??00?0???????????0?????????0????????1010000-0010000000010000000?0001010110010-010?01000001010000110?00100-0000????????????000?00
Guizhouichthyosaurus_tangae    1010-?0001001101100?1111000100000010100000-0110011-0000111111101001001?101010000001001???1??000-?00000?0???0?000000000100????00001?101010011??00???0000?2000100??0?0001010000?00000?200000001000001001110100-0010000000010002120?100000011002---00-1-11-111011100110110110-1000000000010102100010
Guizhouichthyosaurus_wolonggangense    1011000001000101100?1111?00100010010101111101???00?000001111110??1??01110101000???10010011??0??????????0?????????00000?00??????00???01010011???0???00???????????????????????????????2?10001010?????????1???????10000000010?01021???00101010?1??0???011???????????????????????????????????????????
Gulosaurus_helmi    0000-?000111000?00000-00000?????0?0?0010111010??10-01001000001???10-0101010000????000??0?0???????????????????????01001?00??????00???21010?????0000?01????0?0??01???0???????????0??0???200110000000000??????0-??00000000010000000000000101100100010?00000?0???????????????????????????????????????
Hauffiopteryx_typicus    00110?10101-000110000-10011100001011110100-111??11-0110011110200?0100001110100110?1101???????110?1000??0???1?0?0000001?011????100211010100110?10000001101010111020-0111112101101120?2021011010??211101211100-00100000000000121210100110111112--10001-20012102??01111110110-1010010121212202100011
Hudsonelpidia_brevirostris    ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????1??????????????????????????????0?00?1?????????????????????????????????1???????????11?????????0?????????????????????1211000-0010000000??10111210??0100110-1????101??1??111?22100111111--0-00000?0110????1??11121
Hupehsuchus_nanchangensis    01-??0001100?101100?0-0??01???????001010?0-???????????0000000100?10-?????0-?0000??00000000??00???????????????0???000??0???????01-----0-10------------???00?00?000??000????0101?0??00???????????????????10??????10000000010010000?000100010-1000010000000000010100000?00010-??????0?00??000000?000
Ichthyosaurus_anningae    ???1??10111-1011100?11?00111000?10?010????????????????001111?20???????????????????100????????????????????????????00001100??????00????1010?????0????0?????????????????????????????2???12100101001211101211111110110001000101121210??0010101002--?1001-20012112??????????????1??101????????????????
Ichthyosaurus_breviceps    10011?10101-0011100?10?0011100001010000100-111??10-0??001111020??010????110111011?100????????????????????????????00001?00??????0021?010100??0?1000?00???1011111120-011111210110?1???2011?01?1001211101211000-10110000000101121210100010101012--11001-200121122111111110210-0011111221212201000022
Ichthyosaurus_communis    00011010101-10111000101002111000101010011101110011-0110011111200011001111101100110100101?1001110010011101000100000000110010111100211010101110100000001101010111020-01111121011011201202100101001211101211100-10110000000101121210100010101112--11001-200121122100111110210-1011011221212201010022
Ichthyosaurus_conybeari    00111?10011-1?111?0?1??0?111000??0?110?????????????????01111020??1??????1101111???110????????????????????????????00001100??????002??010101????0?00?00???101?111????0111112101100??0?202000101000211101211110-00100000000101121210100010101012--11001-20012102????????????????????????????????????
Janusaurus_lundi    ???11?10011-001?100011?00211000-011011??????10???1?001111111020??10-1---?0-?11111?110????1???1??1102??????????101?1000111?1--11012???1?1??????0??????11??0??1????????????????????10?2121011010??2??1?1211011100100111001???121210??0?0011???????????????????220111?0111--0-101101????????????????
Leninia_stellans    ??????10????00??1?011110??11??0011101111?0-1101-11?01100111112?0110-?????0-11111??100????????111?001???0???????000???1?10????????????1010????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
Leptonectes_moorei    ??????00?101?0?11001???0?2111001?1?0?1?????????????????0?1110???????0001??????????11?????????????????????????????01001101??????0021101010?????10???00????????????????????????????10?21??0????0001111012???0110011000100010112121?100110101102--?00?1-201121??????????????????????????????????????
Leptonectes_solei    1?????0???????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????111????????1????0??????????????01????????????012??????????????????????1???????????1?0???1???????????110111?????????12???00-001001010001??12121?100110110-02--?00?1-101?11?22100110?11--0-??????????????????????
Leptonectes_tenuirostris    11-11?10101-000110000010011100001101100000-1110111-0010011110200?0110101010111011?111011?1??11????00???0?????????0100100011--0100211010100?10?101-00011?2010111021-0110111101101120?211101111001111101211100-00110001000000111210100111111112--10001-101111022?11111110210-1000011121112212110011
Macgowania_janiceps    ???11?1000??101?100?0-?10111?0?000101?????????????????00?111110??1???????0-?1000??101????????????????????????????00001100?1--110021?01010011??1?00?00????????????????????????????????1?0????100121?11?????????????????000?101100?100110101122--100?1-2001210?????????????????????????????????????
Malawania_anachronus    ????????????????????????????10????????????????????????0???????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????11?0?01?11?0?????????????0?10??1????????012?00012??1?111?11001000000012121?000?101011?2-1100?1-1011210?????????????????????????????????????
Mikadocephalus_gracilirostris    101110000000010110010-01?1?1000010101?1000-10???01?000011??1?201?10-001110-10000?01001?1?0000????????100000????01000?1100?1--0?01???01010011??00???01?????????0???????0??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
Mixosaurus_cornalianus    01-0-0000100010100000-01010100001100101001100100011001001111011??0??0001011001011?11001??0??010-??010010000??????0010100111--0?00(0 1)(0 1)1011110110?0000001???1001010100?1110010110000010?202100000000000001010000-0010000000010000021001001001211111110001000100010?0010010(0 1)000-1000000110010100000000
Mixosaurus_kuhnschneyderi    01-0-?00010011?10000110101010?000-001010???00???011???0?1111011??0??01?1?111?101??100????????????????????????????0000000011--0?00(0 1)(0 1)1011110??0?00???01???10?1?10100?11110101000?0??0?1?200000000000000101000??10100000000???0002100?001001????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
Mixosaurus_xindianensis    ?1-0-?0001010101000????101010001000010????????????????01111101??????0101????0101??100????????????????????????????00101100??????00???0111?0????00???00???1001?101???0??00101100?0000?1?2?0100000000000101000??00100000000110000?0?00001001211111110001100000010101000110000-10?0100000010101000000
Mollesaurus_periallus    ??????100?1-101?1???11?????11001011011??????1???????1??0?????2010???0001????111101201101?1??1111100111101100??100?0???????????00121101010???0?11??00011??01?11?????0?????????????2???1???????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
Muiscasaurus_catheti    01110?10010-000?1000???0?211100?111?111??0-110??1??010001?11020??10-????10-111?1??110????????1???102?????????????01001?111?????01???010101???11????00????0?11????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
Nannopterygius_enthekiodon    1?????1????????????????????1??0??1??1????????????????????11???????????????????????11?????????????????????????????0?0???????????01??10?????????0001100???10101111???011???21011?1110???210100101-2011012110?101?110010001???12121????????????????????????????2??????????????111101122111221???????
Ophthalmosaurus_icenicus    00111010101-11111000111002111000111111100101100111101001111112101110001100-111110011011111011110110111101000001000100111111--1101211010101111100011001111011111121-0111112101101110121211110101-201101211011001110111001101121211000010101012--111?1-10111102211(0 1)-0101020111111001221012212100011
Ophthalmosaurus_natans    01-11?1?1???1?00100?1110?2110000111?1101?0-1110111?01001111112101010001100-1111100110111?1??1110?10110?0?1?0?1100010011011?--110121?01010?11??(0 1)101100110?01?111121-011?1121?110?????21(1 2)11110101-211101211011001110111001101121211000010111012--111?1-101?1102????????????????????????????????????
Ophthalmosaurus_yasykovi    00010?1?111-100?100?0-?0?211010???11110??????????????????111?????????????????????????????????????????????????????00101?11??????0121?01010?????11??00011??01?111??010????????????????20210110101-21110121111111111010100110?121011000010010-12--11??1-100?11?2??11111110210-011111????????????????
Palvennia_hoybergeti    01?11?101???0010100011100211000??1101111?0-110??11-001011111?200?10-?????0-1??1???110??111???11011020??0????011010100??1111--??0021?010101?1??0????0011????????????????????????????????????????????????????????1????1????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
Paraophthalmosaurus_sevaljeviensis    ?1-1???????????1100?11????111?0?1120110???????????????00???1?2???0???????????????????????????????????????????????00001111?1--1???????1010?????????????1?????1?1??????????????????2??2?21011010???????12??1111111???1100??????????0?????????????????????????????????????????1?????????????????????
Paraophthalmosaurus_kabanovi    ???????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????00?????????????11??00??????????????????????????????????210110011-101101211110-011001110011??121011000010010-02--1?1???11?11?0???????????????01?110????????????????
Parvinatator_wapitiensis    ???10?000100000?0?0?0-?10101000110?110????????????????0100000100????????????01000??0?????????????????????????????0?0?1100?1--?0001????????????1????00??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????1???00?0010000000?000111111011000100000001010?????????????????????????????????????
Pervushovisaurus_bannovkensis    ???1??10?1?????0??0???1???1????????0?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????0000??1???????0021?01?1??????010110?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
Pessopteryx_nisseri    ????????????????????0-??????????????1?0000-00????????????????????0???????10??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????00??0???0?0??????1???0??????0??????1001111?01010100-0010001000010??012????0?????????????????????????0?000?0???????00000000000001????????
Phalarodon_callawayi    01-11?0001000101010?0-01010100001001101??0-?1??????0??01110?011??0???????11?00001?10?????????????????????????????00011100?1--0000(0 1)(0 1)1010100???00???001?01?0?10??1???1??0??????0???0???????????0001?00????????????????????????????????????????????????????????10?00000000010-1000000010011101001010
Phalarodon_fraasi    ?1-0-?000100110?010?0-0101011?00110?0010111??1??????0?011111011??0??00110110000?1?10?01000????????????????????00100110101?1--0?0010120-0-011??0000021???10?102110??11100101100?01?????21010010000?000101000???0100000000????0?0??0?????????????????????????????????????????10000001000101010000??
Phalarodon_major    ?1-0-??0???????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????001??01010????00000?01????????0?????0??????1??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
Phantomosaurus_neubigi    0??????????????????????????????????????????????????1???????????????????????????????0?1???0??0110?00110010001?0??001001000?1--11001?101010??10?1?00?00?????0?1001001??????????????100????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????11?000????0100-???????1??????????????
Platypterygius_americanus    00010?10111-?011100????00211?01-10101?01???11???11-0??001101120??0??1---?0-1000110100????????1???????????????????00001?11??????00211010100??0?110100011?101?111??1-01111121???1111???????????01-211101211111111110000101???1212100?0110112112--??????2???21????????????????111101??????220????1??
Platypterygius_australis    00110010011-1000100111110211110-111011010111101-11-0000111110200010-1---10-1001110100101?1110111110211101110011100000111111--1100211010101110111010001111010111021-01?11?21???111?????111111101-201101211111111110011001102121210010110112112--11101-20112102??11?11?1?????11111112211122121??122
Platypterygius_hauthali    ?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????1211111111110011101102?2????010?101(0 1)(0 1)0?2--?1101-2??12???????????????????????????????????????
Platypterygius_hercynicus    01-10?1??1?????0100?11100111??0???1011?1010110??11-0100?1????20??10-0???10-11?111??01????????10-11021?10???0???100000111011--110021?01010?????110110?11?1110111100-011????101??1?20?2?21111110??2?1101211111111110001101101121210010010110-12--11101-2001211???????????????111111????????????????
Platypterygius_ochevi    ?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????0?????????0??????1???1??????????????????????12111110111101?1001???121210000110110-12---1101-21-1210?????????????????????????????????????
Platypterygius_platydactylus    0??????????????????????????1????????1????????????????????????????????????????????1???????????1??11021?10?11???10000001?11??????0?21?01010?????1????0?11?101?111??1-01?11121???????????110111101-211?01211111111110010001102021210010110110-12--11101-20?1210?????????????????????????????????????
Platypterygius_sachicarum    01-11?10011-001?100????0021??0001110?0???????????????????10?0?0??????????????01?1?10??????????????0??????????????00001?1011--??0021?010100??0111??100????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
Qianichthyosaurus_xingyiensis    01-11?0001000001000?0-?10011000111?01110???011???0?0??00?110010?????01?1?11???????111????????????????????????????01001?00??????00??????????????????00?????????????????????????????????1111??1010100?1111100??0-1000000000?0000110100100010-0?--??0?1-11-1110?????????????????????????????????????
Qianichthyosaurus_zhoui    11-0-?00000000010?010-01?1?10000101010???0??1100?0??1?00001001???0??01?1011?1100??1110???0???0???1?0?????????????010?1100????0?000?101?10011101????00???101?11?1????1?00101??1?0??????11011010???????121101??101000?00000??00011?100100010-12--??0?1-1??111?101001001?0010-1???000100010202111?11
Shastasaurus_alexandrae    0000-?00010000?100100-?1110100000010101010-010??01?0100100000101001101010101000?0?10010110??0????00??0?000???????00101100????????????????????????????00??0?011?0011??????????????????1100?01100?0000011101?0-0?100000?000??001?????0?00??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
Shastasaurus_liangae    01-10?010100?000000?0-011001000100001000110010001000000000000101?00-00?1010011??0?100?????????????0??????????????00101100??????1-----????-11---------?0?2000101?0??01-00101??????1??????????????0????10101?0-1?10000000010?011210100000010-02---00-1-11-111021100110010110-00010000001102?2100011
Shastasaurus_pacificus    0000-?00?1??0?00001?0-0??101000000101010110010000110000000000101?00-0101010111????100?????????????0??????????????0010??????????1-----????-11---------????00??0?02110?????????????0?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????001????011????????????????????????
Shastasaurus_sikkaniensis    ?1-?????????????0?0?11????????????????0??1?010??01??00???????1???????????1111100???001???????????????????????????01??11???1--??1-----??0--11---------???210?100??0001-?0101??????10-20?100?0?0??0????101010??101?00?00001??001?1????????????????????????????????0????????????????????????????????
Shonisaurus_popularis    00?10?01111-1011000?0-00?0010000100?10??????1?0010?0?00?1????1??000-????0???0001?110010??????111?0000???0??0?000100001100?000010111101010?1101000000000?100010100010000010100?0??000200100001000100001110100-0010010000011000120010001001--12---00-1-11-111010100000110110-1000001110011212110011
Simbirskiasaurus_birjukovi    ?0111?1?111-?00?10011110031?00????10111??11???????????????????????????????????????1??????????1???11-1??????????????????????????002??010???????110010??????0?11???0-0??????1??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
Sisteronia_seeleyi    ?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????0??????????1110111-0110111?1??10?????????????100?????????????011-?0????????111??0???????????????????????????01-2?11012????????1100??10??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
Stenopterygius_aaleniensis    01-10?10111-100?1001101002111000??10110100-01???11-010001111020??1??010111011???0?1?1?????????????????????????????000????1?????00?1?010100??0?1???000???101??11121-0111112101????2??21210110111-2111?12110110111100000000???21???000110111112--11001-1001??????????????????1?????????????????????
Stenopterygius_quadriscissus    00110110101-001110001?10021100001110100100-1110011-010011111020??11000111101010100100111?1?10110000000101100001100000111111--0100211010100110110010001111010111020-01111121011011101212101101(0 1)1-211101211011000110000000011121210000110111112--10001-200121122111110110210-0111011121112202110022
Stenopterygius_triscissus    00110110101-000010001010021100001010100100-1110011-0100011110200?1100011110101110?1101?1?1??0110??0000101100?01100000111111--0100211010100110?10010001111010111020-0111112101101120121211110101-211101211011000100000000001121210000110111112--10001-200121122111110110210-0110011121212202110021
Stenopterygius_uniter    00110?10101-0010100?1?10021100001110100100-1110011-010001111020??1100011110101110?1101?1?1??01????000010?10??011?000011111?????00211010100110?10010001111010111020-0111112101101110121210110101-211101211011010110000000001121210000110111112--10001-200121122111110110210-0??1011121112202110121
Suevoleviathan_disinteger    00011?10101-1001100?1110011110?0111010010??1110011-011001111120??010011101011111??101??????????????????????????1?00000111?1--110020?01?1?0??0?2?00?00?0?1?101110?0-01101121011??12????21011010???????1211100-00100000000102121210100110110-12---10-1-11-111122000010?11--0-10?0011121212202110111
Suevoleviathan_integer    00011?10101-1011100?111001111?0011101001???111??11-0??0?1101020??0100?1101011111??101????????????????????????????00001011?1--??0021?010100??0?2???000???10101110?0-011?11210110?12????21111010???????121110??0011001000010?12121?100110110-12--????1-1??1111?????????????????????????????????????
Sveltonectes_insolitus    ?1-1??10001-??0110011110?0?11?00??1111?011011????1?011011111?1???10???????????????1????1?0???1??1102101?101??????01001?01?????10121101010011??110100????1?0?111????01??1121???1?11??2?210110101-21110120-0111111100?00011011?1????00100001012--110?1-10112102??11??10?1--0-1111011221112212100122
Temnodontosaurus_azerguensis    1???????????????????????????0????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????1????00?00???00????001????????????1-----0?0?-?-----??---01?????11??????????????????????????????????21???12??????0?11011100?0?002121?110000110-?2---00?1-11-?21022?????0???????1101?112200022???1?011
Temnodontosaurus_eurycephalus    00111?10101-1010100????0011110101?11100???????????????0??11???????????????????????100????????????????????????????000011111????100211010100????1000000????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
Temnodontosaurus_nuertingensis    ?0011?10101-1011?00????0011111???????????????????????????????????????????????????????1?1????1???????????1????????00001110?01?010021?01010?110?100000011??0??1????0-??????????????1????21011010???????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
Temnodontosaurus_platyodon    00111?10111-101110001110021111101110100100-1110011-010001101120?011000010101111110101111?1??11??010000001?00100?00000111011-1?100211010100110?00000201101010111020-0110112101100110?20110(0 1)10101-211101211110-0011001000000?121210100100011112---00-1-21-121021101110110210-1100010121202202110010
Temnodontosaurus_trigonodon    00111?10111-101110001110021111101110100100-1110011-0100011011201011000110101000110100101?1??11100001010011001010000001110?????100211010100110?10000201101010111020-0110112101100110?20110110101-211101211100-001100000000011(1 2)1210100110111102---00-0-11-111022101111110210-1100010121102202110011
Thalattoarchon_saurophagis    ????????????????1???11?????100000?101001?11001???1?000010000?10??00-0?1?011000????100????????????????????????????010?1?????????000?101?010?????000020????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????00????????????10????????????????????
Toretocnemus_californicus    ?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????0????????0???????100??0???????????????????????100?????1???0??0001??10?????0?11010-????-00?1-01-100?12100000?10000-10000101101102021110??
Toretocnemus_zitteli    ???????0????1??????????????1000???????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????00?1100?????100211010101??1?1?00?00????????????????????????????1??10211100100020100111000??0011000000001011021?101110110-02---00?1-01-1000???????????????10000101101112021?1100
Undorosaurus_gorodischensis    ???????0?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????0???????????????????????????????????????????????00????????????0?21??1010?????11??10011??0??11?????011????1???????????210110101-20110121111??1111000100110112121?000110110-12---11-1-11-11102??101111101010111101122111220??00???
Undorosaurus_trautscholdi    ?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????1211011001100111101?01121211000110111012--10101-200?110?????????????????????????????????????
Utatsusaurus_hataii    0000-?000000000?000?0-01000100000000000011000???10-000010000010?????00?0010000????000??000???????????????????????000?11000001??0000101010??0??0000000???????????0???000??????????????????????????????1010000-0010000000010010000000010000100100010000000001010000000?1?????0?????????????????????
Wimanius_odontopalatus    0000-?1000000?01000???00?1?1000111?0???????????????0???1?11??10?????01?1????0000???000???0??????????????????0????01001100?1-???0011?110100011?0????00????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
Xinminosaurus_catactes    0??????0???????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????00???1????????0?????22???2??????????????01?1??????????????????0000?00??01100??0-1000000001?010010?100000111-0?-?010?00000?000???????????????000000000011010?00?000
```

Phylogenetic analysis {#appB:Phylocode}
---------------------

Below is included the code used to run the phylogenetic analyses in
monospace font − notes are in roman font.

### Equal weights maximum parsimony {#appB:Phylocode-1TNT}

The following script
([\[lst:scripttntrun\]](#lst:scripttntrun){reference-type="ref"
reference="lst:scripttntrun"}) was used in the equal weights parsimony
analysis in TNT [@Goloboff2008]. This starts by applying settings and
running the tree search, and support calculations, then calls two
further scripts: `STATS.RUN`, included with the TNT installation, and
`ITERPCR.RUN` [@Pol2009]. The script is called with the following
command in TNT:

``` {style="code" numbers="none"}
run TNT.RUN %1 %2;
```

where the arguments `%1` and `%2` are replaced with the name of the
matrix file (excluding the `.tnt` file extension), and the name or
number of the outgroup OTU, i.e.:

``` {style="code" numbers="none"}
run TNT.RUN ichthyosaur Hupehsuchus_nanchangensis;
```

Initial call and settings of macro.

``` {#lst:scripttntrun name="TNTscript" caption="Script \\texttt{TNT.RUN} used in the maximum parsimony analysis of the ichthyosaur morphological data matrix (\\cref{appB:Taxoncodes})." label="lst:scripttntrun" style="code"}
macro -;
macro =;
if (argnumber == 0) quote THIS SCRIPT REQUIRES TWO ARGUMENTS (1) filename of the dataset (without extension) (2) the outgroup (if any).; 
proc/; 
end;
```

Increase RAM to 1000  MB, load data matrix, and change viewing settings.
The settings in line eight do the following

`log %1.out` starts a log file with the file extension `.out`

`echo =;` copies the commands used to the buffer and output file

`rseed 0;` sets the random seed based on the system clock (similar to
PAUP\*)

`watch =;` records time taken for commands to complete

`taxname =;` shows trees with taxon names rather than numbers

`naked -;` shows node numbers on printed trees

`report +/1;` reports search progress each replicate

`taxcode +;` lists OTUs and whether they are active

`cnames;` lists characters.

Listing OTUs and characters is useful to show the numbers referred to by
TNT (these both begin from 0).

``` {name="TNTscript" style="code" title="\\textsf{\\addfontfeatures{Letters={SmallCaps,UppercaseSmallCaps}} Listing \\thelstlisting\\quad continued}"}
mxram 1000;
proc \%1.tnt;
log \%1.out; echo =; rseed 0; watch =; taxname =; naked -; report +/1; taxcode +; cnames;
```

Set drift (`drift`), sectorial search (`sectsch`), multiple replicates
tree search (`xmult`), and tree-bisection reconnection ( TBR) settings
(`bbreak`), and outgroup. Up to 100 000 trees are retained in memory
(`hold 100000;`). These settings are based upon the script
`aquickie.run` included with TNT. The new technology searches allow
rapid coverage of tree topology to find the most parsimonious trees
while avoiding being confined to local minima, but this finds a set of
trees. All MPTs − up to 100 000 − are found subsequently using TBR.

``` {name="TNTscript" style="code" title="\\textsf{\\addfontfeatures{Letters={SmallCaps,UppercaseSmallCaps}} Listing \\thelstlisting\\quad continued}"}
drift : fitdiff 2 rfitdiff 0.1;
sectsch : xss gocomb 60 fuse 4 drift 10 combstarts 5;
xmult : xss hits 100 drift 10 ratchet 200;
bbreak : tbr safe xbit fillonly;
if (argnumber > 1) outgroup \%2;
end ;
keep 0; hold 100000;
```

Do tree search and TBR, save trees to file with extension
`.tmp.tnttree`; also save trees to short format tree file with extension
`.ctf`. Remove all trees from memory; increase held trees to 200 000.

``` {name="TNTscript" style="code" title="\\textsf{\\addfontfeatures{Letters={SmallCaps,UppercaseSmallCaps}} Listing \\thelstlisting\\quad continued}"}
xmult; bbreak; tsave * %1.tmp.tnttree; save; tsave /; tsave %1.ctf; save; tsave/;keep 0; hold 200000;
```

Reload trees from file ending `.tmp.tnttree`; calculate common
apomorphies: print onto tree in buffer and list; save also to SVG file
ending `.apo.svg`. Remove all trees from memory.

``` {name="TNTscript" style="code" title="\\textsf{\\addfontfeatures{Letters={SmallCaps,UppercaseSmallCaps}} Listing \\thelstlisting\\quad continued}"}
proc %1.tmp.tnttree; apo [0.; apo [- 0.; ttags =; apo [ 0.; ttags &%1.apo.svg; ttags -;  keep 0;	
```

Reload trees from file ending `.tmp.tnttree`; compute strict consensus
tree (`nelsen;`) and 50% majority rule tree (`majority=50;`); save these
to a tree file ending `.con.tnttree`. Remove all trees from memory.

``` {name="TNTscript" style="code" title="\\textsf{\\addfontfeatures{Letters={SmallCaps,UppercaseSmallCaps}} Listing \\thelstlisting\\quad continued}"}
proc %1.tmp.tnttree; nelsen; nelsen *; tsave * %1.con.tnttree; save /; keep 0;
proc %1.tmp.tnttree; majority=50; majority=50 *; save /; tsave /; keep 0;	
```

Choose strict consensus tree. Calculate Bremer supports on strict
consensus tree using TBR on the MPTs (`bsupport !!+0 1.`) to find
suboptimal trees up to 10 steps longer then relative Bremer values of
0.9. Print to buffer and log, and create SVG file ending `.bremer.svg`.

``` {name="TNTscript" style="code" title="\\textsf{\\addfontfeatures{Letters={SmallCaps,UppercaseSmallCaps}} Listing \\thelstlisting\\quad continued}"}
proc %1.tmp.tnttree; nelsen*; 
tchoose { strict }; ttags =; sub 10; proc %1.tmp.tnttree; bsupport !!+0 1.; sub 10x0.90; bsupport [!!+0 1.; ttags; ttags &%1.bremer.svg; sub 0x1; ttags -;  
```

Keep strict consensus tree in memory. Do symmetrical resampling support
analysis using replicate analysis, holding one tree each time
(`resample [mu1=ho1;] sym;`), with 10 000 replicates. Print to buffer
and long, and create SVG file ending `.resample.svg`. Remove all trees
from memory.

``` {name="TNTscript" style="code" title="\\textsf{\\addfontfeatures{Letters={SmallCaps,UppercaseSmallCaps}} Listing \\thelstlisting\\quad continued}"}
keep 1; ttags =; resample [mu1=ho1;] sym rep 10000 prob 33 freq from 0; keep 1; ttags; ttags &%1.bootstrap.svg; ttags -; keep 0;
```

Load strict and majority rule consensus trees, and calculate consistency
and retention indices using script `STATS.RUN`. Remove all trees from
memory.

``` {name="TNTscript" style="code" title="\\textsf{\\addfontfeatures{Letters={SmallCaps,UppercaseSmallCaps}} Listing \\thelstlisting\\quad continued}"}
proc %1.con.tnttree;
run STATS.RUN; keep 0;
```

Close log file and stop echoing commands to log; increase held trees to
200 000. These are important for running the script `ITERPCR.RUN`
subsequently.

``` {name="TNTscript" style="code" title="\\textsf{\\addfontfeatures{Letters={SmallCaps,UppercaseSmallCaps}} Listing \\thelstlisting\\quad continued}"}
log /;
ech -; hold 200000;
```

Run PCR pruning using script `ITERPCR.RUN` [@Pol2009] then quit TNT.

``` {name="TNTscript" style="code" title="\\textsf{\\addfontfeatures{Letters={SmallCaps,UppercaseSmallCaps}} Listing \\thelstlisting\\quad continued}"}
run ITERPCR.RUN \%1;
log /;
quit;
macro -;
```

### Maximum likelihood {#appB:Phylocode-2RAxML}

The code in [\[lst:raxmlcode\]](#lst:raxmlcode){reference-type="ref"
reference="lst:raxmlcode"} is used in the maximum likelihood analysis in
RAxML analysis [@Stamatakis2014]. For most runs, the parallel version of
RAxML (`raxmlHPC-PTHREAD-AVX`) is used, with the number of threads set
to four (`-T 4`). If using the single processor version
(`raxmlHPC-AVX`), this command should be omitted. In all cases
MULTIGAMMA substitution of the Mk model is used.

Run a rapid bootstrap analysis (`-f a`) with 1000 replicates and output
files appended with `.out`. This finds the most likely tree, and
calculates bootstrap support values for the nodes present. The outgroup
is set to *Hupehsuchus nanchangensis*, and the random seeds for search
and bootstrap are set to the same value (`-p 20141002124734` and
`-x 20141002124734`).

``` {#lst:raxmlcode name="RAxMLcode" style="code" caption="RAxML code used in the maximum likelihood analysis of the ichthyosaur morphological data matrix (\\cref{appB:Taxoncodes})." label="lst:raxmlcode"}
./raxmlHPC-PTHREADS-AVX -p 20141002124734 -f a -s matrix_RAxML.phy -n out -o Hupehsuchus_nanchangensis -m MULTIGAMMA -K MK -x 20141002124734 -N 1000 -T 4
```

*A posteriori* bootstopping analysis to assess convergence of the
bootstrap analysis using extended majority-rule consensus tree
[@Pattengale2009].

``` {name="RAxMLcode" style="code" title="\\textsf{\\addfontfeatures{Letters={SmallCaps,UppercaseSmallCaps}} Listing \\thelstlisting\\quad continued}"}
./raxmlHPC-AVX -p 20141002124734 -o Hupehsuchus_nanchangensis -m MULTIGAMMA -K MK -z RAxML_bootstrap.out -I autoMRE -n out-bootstrap
```

Calculate log likelihood (SH-test; `-f h`) between trees found in
bootstrap search and best tree.

``` {name="RAxMLcode" style="code" title="\\textsf{\\addfontfeatures{Letters={SmallCaps,UppercaseSmallCaps}} Listing \\thelstlisting\\quad continued}"}
./raxmlHPC-PTHREADS-AVX -f h -t RAxML_bestTree.out -z RAxML_bootstrap.out -s matrix_RAxML.phy -m MULTIGAMMA -K MK -n out-SH -T 4
```

The code in
[\[lst:raxmlestimation\]](#lst:raxmlestimation){reference-type="ref"
reference="lst:raxmlestimation"} is separate from the above. This
estimates the likelihood of a set of trees input in Newick (parenthesis)
format for a given alignment (matrix). The output likelihoods are
exported in treepuzzle format, to be used in likelihood tests in CONSEL.
These can be used to compare maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood
trees.

``` {#lst:raxmlestimation name="RAxMLcode2" style="code" caption="Estimation of likelihood for a set of input trees using RAxML." numbers="none" label="lst:raxmlestimation"}
./raxmlHPC-PTHREADS-AVX -f G -s matrix_RAxML.phy -m MULTIGAMMA -K MK -z trees.tre -n consel -T 4
```

### Bayesian-inference maximum likelihood {#appB:Phylocode-3MrBayes}

The following code is entered into the MrBayes block of a NEXUS file to
run automatically by entering

``` {style="code" numbers="none"}
execute ichthyosaurs.nex
```

Invoking the equal- or gamma-rates prior is done with the command
`lset rates=equal` or `lset rates=gamma`. The Markov Chain Monte Carlo
MCMC run (`mcmc`) must be run after changing these commands.

#### Code to find prior distributions

show MrBayes code blocks that compute a short analysis without data
(`data=no`) to produce the prior distributions, given the settings for
the analysis. Discussion of the commands is given for the tree search
below.

``` {#lst:mrbayesequalprior style="code" caption="MrBayes block for calculating prior under equal rates site substitution." label="lst:mrbayesequalprior"}
begin mrbayes;
set autoclose=yes nowarn=yes;
outgroup Hupehsuchus_nanchangensis;
unlink statefreq=(all) revmat=(all) shape=(all) pinvar=(all); 
prset applyto=(all) symdirihyperpr=fixed(infinity);
lset nst=6 rates=equal coding=all;
mcmcp data=no ngen=3000000 printfreq=100 samplefreq=100 nruns=1 nchains=1;
mcmc filename=equal-prior;
quit;
end;
```

``` {#lst:mrbayesgammaprior style="code" caption="MrBayes block for calculating prior under gamma rates site substitution." label="lst:mrbayesgammaprior"}
begin mrbayes;
set autoclose=yes nowarn=yes;
outgroup Hupehsuchus_nanchangensis;
unlink statefreq=(all) revmat=(all) shape=(all) pinvar=(all); 
prset applyto=(all) symdirihyperpr=fixed(infinity);
lset nst=6 rates=gamma coding=all;
mcmcp data=no ngen=3000000 printfreq=100 samplefreq=100 nruns=1 nchains=1;
mcmc filename=gamma-prior;
quit;
end;
```

#### Code to perform  MCMC tree search

shows and discusses the code in the MrBayes block that automates the
prior selection and MCMC search for the most likely trees under equal
rates site substitution prior. The commands for the tree search under a
gamma distribution prior are given in
[\[lst:mrbayesgamma\]](#lst:mrbayesgamma){reference-type="ref"
reference="lst:mrbayesgamma"}. The files `matrix_Mrbayes_equal.nex` and
`matrix_Mrbayes_gamma.nex` is executed within MrBayes with the command

``` {style="code" numbers="none"}
execute matrix_Mrbayes_equal.nex; £\textbf{\textrm{or}}£
execute matrix_Mrbayes_gamma.nex;
```

or on 4 parallel processors/cores using `mpirun -np 4`:

``` {style="code" numbers="none"}
mpirun -np 4 mb matrix_Mrbayes_equal.nex > equal.out & £\textbf{\textrm{or}}£
mpirun -np 4 mb matrix_Mrbayes_gamma.nex > gamma.out &
```

Signal the start of the MrBayes block and don't require intervention;
set outgroup to *Hupehsuchus nanchangensis*.

``` {#lst:mrbayesequal name="MrBayesequal" style="code" caption="MrBayes block for {{\\addfontfeatures{Letters={SmallCaps,UppercaseSmallCaps},LetterSpace=5} MCMC}} tree search with an equal distribution rates site substitution prior." label="lst:mrbayesequal"}
begin mrbayes;
set autoclose=yes nowarn=yes;
outgroup Hupehsuchus_nanchangensis;
```

Unlink character model parameters across all partitions, particularly
state frequencies, proportion of invariable states, gamma shape
parameter, and substitution rates. This acts to make characters
independent.

``` {style="code" name="MrBayesequal" title="\\textsf{\\addfontfeatures{Letters={SmallCaps,UppercaseSmallCaps}} Listing \\thelstlisting\\quad continued}"}
unlink statefreq=(all) revmat=(all) shape=(all) pinvar=(all); 
```

Sets prior to a symmetrical Dirichlet hyperprior fixed on infinity,
giving characters states equal likelihood. The model is set to allow
substitution rates to be different (`nst=6`), with no rate variation
across sites (`rates=equal`). Using gamma-distributed rate variation
across sites requires `rates=gamma`
([\[lst:mrbayesgamma\]](#lst:mrbayesgamma){reference-type="ref"
reference="lst:mrbayesgamma"}).

``` {style="code" name="MrBayesequal" title="\\textsf{\\addfontfeatures{Letters={SmallCaps,UppercaseSmallCaps}} Listing \\thelstlisting\\quad continued}"}
prset applyto=(all) symdirihyperpr=fixed(infinity);
lset nst=6 rates=equal coding=all;
```

The command `mcmcp;` sets up the MCMC analysis. This is run for up to
10^8^ generations on four runs with four chains, but is stopped earlier
if the convergence diagnostic (average standard deviation in partition
frequency, ASPF) reaches 0.007. Trees sampling every 1000 generations,
with the first 25% discarded (`burninfrac=0.25`). The command
`mcmc filename=equal-full;` starts the run, saving the output to files
beginning `equal-full`.

``` {style="code" name="MrBayesequal" title="\\textsf{\\addfontfeatures{Letters={SmallCaps,UppercaseSmallCaps}} Listing \\thelstlisting\\quad continued}"}
mcmcp temp=0.1 ngen=100000000 mcmcdiagn=yes stoprule=yes stopval=0.007 relburnin=yes burninfrac=0.25  printfreq=5000  samplefreq=1000 nruns=4 nchains=4 savebrlens=yes;
mcmc filename=equal-full;
```

The following performs a stepping-stone analysis over 3.1 × 10^7^
generations, sampling every 10^6^ generations, with α = 0.4.
Stepping-stone sampling provides a more accurate estimation of the
marginal likelihood than the harmonic mean [@Xie2011], which is used in
Bayes factor hypothesis testing
([5.6](#appB:Bayesfactors){reference-type="ref"
reference="appB:Bayesfactors"}). Saves output to files beginning
`equal-ss`.

``` {style="code" name="MrBayesequal" title="\\textsf{\\addfontfeatures{Letters={SmallCaps,UppercaseSmallCaps}} Listing \\thelstlisting\\quad continued}"}
ss ngen=31000000 nsteps=30 stoprule=no alpha=0.4 filename=equal-ss;
```

The following commands summarise the trees, model parameters, and
likelihood statistics for the MCMC search saved in files beginning
`equal-full`. The consensus trees are output in Newick (parenthesis)
format.

``` {style="code" name="MrBayesequal" title="\\textsf{\\addfontfeatures{Letters={SmallCaps,UppercaseSmallCaps}} Listing \\thelstlisting\\quad continued}"}
sump filename=equal-full;
sumt filename=equal-full;
quit;
end;
```

``` {#lst:mrbayesgamma name="MrBayesgamma" style="code" caption="MrBayes block for {{\\addfontfeatures{Letters={SmallCaps,UppercaseSmallCaps},LetterSpace=5} MCMC}} tree search with a gamma distribution rates site substitution prior." label="lst:mrbayesgamma"}
begin mrbayes;
set autoclose=yes nowarn=yes;
outgroup Hupehsuchus_nanchangensis;
unlink statefreq=(all) revmat=(all) shape=(all) pinvar=(all); 
prset applyto=(all) symdirihyperpr=fixed(infinity);
lset nst=6 rates=gamma coding=all;
mcmcp temp=0.1 ngen=100000000 mcmcdiagn=yes stoprule=yes stopval=0.007 relburnin=yes burninfrac=0.25  printfreq=5000  samplefreq=1000 nruns=4 nchains=4 savebrlens=yes;
mcmc filename=gamma-full;
ss ngen=31000000 nsteps=30 stoprule=no alpha=0.4 filename=gamma-ss;
sump filename=gamma-full;
sumt filename=gamma-full;
quit;
end;
```

### Implied weights maximum parsimony {#appB:Phylocode-4PIWE}

The TNT code used to run the implied weights analysis is taken from
@Smith2014 but has been extended to include a round of PCR pruning
(`pcrprun;`). A less intensive round of new technology searching is used
(`xmult:hits 8 rat10 drift10 xss;`) and fewer trees are held in memory
(10 000: `hold 10000`) than in
[\[lst:scripttntrun\]](#lst:scripttntrun){reference-type="ref"
reference="lst:scripttntrun"}, and a timeout length of 30 minutes
(`timeout 00:30:00;`) because of the repeated number of runs and
computation required. Additionally, the timeout prevents apparent
'sticking' of the search: earlier runs became stuck searching for over
17 hours before hitting the tree hold limit that ended the search. Most
analyses found the shortest tree eight times, so went through before
hitting the time limit. In other analyses, no shorter tree was found
using TBR, so the results are considered reliable. Commands are
explained further in discussion of the script `TNT.RUN` above
([\[lst:scripttntrun,appB:Phylocode-1TNT\]](#lst:scripttntrun,appB:Phylocode-1TNT){reference-type="ref"
reference="lst:scripttntrun,appB:Phylocode-1TNT"}).

``` {#lst:piwe name="piwe" style="code" caption="Script \\texttt{PIWE.RUN} used for implied weights analysis in {{\\addfontfeatures{Letters={SmallCaps,UppercaseSmallCaps},LetterSpace=5} TNT}}." label="lst:piwe"}
macro =;
if (argnumber == 0) quote THIS SCRIPT REQUIRES TWO ARGUMENTS (1) filename of the dataset (without extension) (2) the outgroup (if any).; 
proc/; 
end;
mxram 1000;
var = 1
i;
if (argnumber > 1) set i $%2; end;
proc %1.tnt;
log %1.piwe.out; echo =; watch =; taxname =; naked -; report +/1;
drift:fitdiff 2 rfitdiff 0.1;
sectsch:xss gocomb 60 fuse 4 drift 10 combstarts 5;
xmult:hits 8 rat10 drift10 xss;
bbreak:safe xbit fillonly;
timeout 00:30:00;
if (argnumber > 1) outgroup %2; 
end ;
keep 0; hold 10000; 
piwe-;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.e.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.e.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=0.118;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.0.118.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.0.118.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=0.183;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.0.183.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.0.183.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=0.242;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.0.242.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.0.242.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=0.298;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.0.298.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.0.298.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=0.354;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.0.354.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.0.354.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=0.409;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.0.409.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.0.409.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=0.464;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.0.464.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.0.464.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=0.521;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.0.521.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.0.521.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=0.577;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.0.577.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.0.577.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=0.635;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.0.635.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.0.635.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=0.694;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.0.694.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.0.694.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=0.754;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.0.754.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.0.754.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=0.815;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.0.815.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.0.815.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=0.878;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.0.878.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.0.878.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=0.943;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.0.943.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.0.943.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=1.008;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.1.008.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.1.008.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=1.076;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.1.076.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.1.076.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=1.145;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.1.145.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.1.145.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=1.217;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.1.217.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.1.217.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=1.290;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.1.290.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.1.290.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=1.365;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.1.365.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.1.365.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=1.442;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.1.442.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.1.442.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=1.522;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.1.522.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.1.522.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=1.604;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.1.604.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.1.604.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=1.688;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.1.688.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.1.688.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=1.775;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.1.775.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.1.775.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=1.864;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.1.864.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.1.864.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=1.956;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.1.956.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.1.956.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=2.051;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.2.051.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.2.051.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=2.149;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.2.149.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.2.149.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=2.251;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.2.251.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.2.251.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=2.355;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.2.355.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.2.355.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=2.463;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.2.463.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.2.463.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=2.574;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.2.574.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.2.574.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=2.689;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.2.689.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.2.689.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=2.808;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.2.808.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.2.808.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=2.930;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.2.930.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.2.930.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=3.058;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.3.058.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.3.058.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=3.189;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.3.189.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.3.189.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=3.325;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.3.325.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.3.325.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=3.466;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.3.466.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.3.466.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=3.612;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.3.612.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.3.612.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=3.764;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.3.764.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.3.764.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=3.921;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.3.921.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.3.921.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=4.084;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.4.084.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.4.084.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=4.253;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.4.253.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.4.253.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=4.429;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.4.429.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.4.429.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=4.612;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.4.612.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.4.612.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=4.802;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.4.802.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.4.802.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=5.000;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.5.000.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.5.000.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=5.205;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.5.205.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.5.205.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=5.420;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.5.420.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.5.420.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=5.643;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.5.643.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.5.643.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=5.877;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.5.877.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.5.877.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=6.120;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.6.120.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.6.120.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=6.375;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.6.375.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.6.375.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=6.641;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.6.641.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.6.641.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=6.919;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.6.919.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.6.919.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=7.211;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.7.211.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.7.211.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=7.517;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.7.517.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.7.517.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=7.838;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.7.838.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.7.838.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=8.175;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.8.175.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.8.175.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=8.529;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.8.529.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.8.529.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=8.902;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.8.902.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.8.902.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=9.296;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.9.296.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.9.296.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=9.711;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.9.711.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.9.711.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=10.14;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.10.14.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.10.14.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=10.61;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.10.61.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.10.61.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=11.10;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.11.10.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.11.10.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=11.62;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.11.62.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.11.62.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=12.18;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.12.18.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.12.18.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=12.77;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.12.77.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.12.77.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=13.40;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.13.40.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.13.40.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=14.08;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.14.08.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.14.08.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=14.80;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.14.80.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.14.80.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=15.58;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.15.58.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.15.58.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=16.42;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.16.42.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.16.42.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=17.32;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.17.32.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.17.32.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=18.30;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.18.30.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.18.30.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=19.37;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.19.37.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.19.37.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=20.53;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.20.53.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.20.53.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=21.81;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.21.81.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.21.81.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=23.22;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.23.22.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.23.22.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=24.77;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.24.77.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.24.77.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=26.50;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.26.50.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.26.50.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=28.44;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.28.44.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.28.44.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=30.63;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.30.63.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.30.63.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=33.13;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.33.13.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.33.13.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=35.99;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.35.99.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.35.99.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=39.33;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.39.33.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.39.33.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=43.26;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.43.26.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.43.26.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=47.98;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.47.98.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.47.98.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=53.76;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.53.76.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.53.76.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=61.05;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.61.05.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.61.05.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=70.57;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.70.57.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.70.57.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=83.68;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.83.68.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.83.68.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=103.1;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.103.1.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.103.1.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=136.2;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.136.2.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.136.2.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
piwe=211.3;xmult;bbreak;tsav *%1.211.3.tre;sav;tsav/;pcrprun;tsav *%1.211.3.strict.tre;nels*;sav/;tsav/;keep 0; hold 10000;
quit;
macro -;
```

Apomorphies of the preferred tree {#appB:Apomorphies}
---------------------------------

The following lists common taxon autapomorphies and clade synapomorphies
that describe the preferred tree − the pruned most parsimonious trees
from equal weights TNT analysis
([\[fig:TNTprunedstrict\]](#fig:TNTprunedstrict){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TNTprunedstrict"}). These are listed for relevant clades
in Systematic Palaeontology.

### Autapomorphies

Unambiguous autapomorphies are indicated with 'All trees', while 'Some
trees' indicates ambiguous autapomorphies.

``` {basicstyle="\\ttfamily\\footnotesize" breaklines="true" extendedchars="true" multicols="2" texcl="true" escapechar="£" numbers="none"}
£\emph{Acamptonectes densus}:£
All trees: 
	Char. 114: 0£→£1 
	Char. 153: 0£→£1 
	Char. 182: 2£→£1 
	Char. 223: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Aegirosaurus leptospondylus}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 8: 1£→£0 
	Char. 156: 1£→£0 
	Char. 204: 1£→£0 
	Char. 205: 1£→£0 
	Char. 223: 1£→£0 
	Char. 230: 0£→£1 
	Char. 232: 0£→£1 
	Char. 245: 1£→£2 

£\emph{Arthropterygius chrisorum}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 96: 1£→£0 
	Char. 149: 1£→£0 
Some trees: 
	Char. 201: 0£→£1 
	Char. 267: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Athabascasaurus bitumineus}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 13: 0£→£1 
	Char. 54: 0£→£1 
	Char. 99: 2£→£1 

£\emph{Barracudasauroides panxianensis}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 13: 1£→£0 
	Char. 56: 1£→£0 
	Char. 59: 1£→£0 
	Char. 129: 1£→£0 
	Char. 180: 1£→£2 
	Char. 184: 0£→£1 
	Char. 226: 0£→£1 
	Char. 268: 0£→£1 
	Char. 279: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Besanosaurus leptorhynchus}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 10: 0£→£1 
	Char. 18: 0£→£1 
	Char. 23: 1£→£0 
	Char. 30: 0£→£1 
	Char. 34: 1£→£2 
	Char. 36: 1£→£0 
	Char. 38: 1£→£0 
	Char. 125: 0£→£1 
	Char. 142: 0£→£1 
	Char. 158: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Brachypterygius alekseevi}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 211: 1£→£0 
	Char. 213: 0£→£1 
	Char. 234: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Brachypterygius extremus}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 2: 1£→£0 
	Char. 39: 1£→£0 
	Char. 82: 1£→£2 

£\emph{Brachypterygius pseudoscythica}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 142: 1£→£0 
	Char. 187: 0£→£1 
	Char. 214: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Californosaurus perrini}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 192: 2£→£0 
	Char. 222: 2£→£1 
	Char. 229: 1£→£0 
	Char. 271: 0£→£1 
	Char. 280: 2£→£0 

£\emph{Callawayia neoscapularis}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 20: 0£→£1 
	Char. 25: 1£→£0 
	Char. 26: 1£→£0 
	Char. 84: 1£→£0 
	Char. 142: 1£→£0 
	Char. 193: 1£→£0 
	Char. 225: 1£→£0 
	Char. 228: 1£→£0 
	Char. 231: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Cartorhynchus lenticarpus}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 7: 0£→£1 
	Char. 15: 1£→£0 
	Char. 34: 0£→£1 
	Char. 60: 0£→£1 
	Char. 240: 1£→£0 
Some trees: 
	Char. 36: 1£→£0 
	Char. 78: 0£→£1 
	Char. 119: 0£→£1 
	Char. 120: 0£→£1 
	Char. 127: 0£→£1 
	Char. 180: 1£→£0 
	Char. 219: 0£→£1 
	Char. 270: 0£→£1 
	Char. 272: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Caypullisaurus bonapartei}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 25: 2£→£1 
	Char. 117: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Chacaicosaurus cayi}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 232: 1£→£0 
	Char. 246: 0£→£1 
	Char. 268: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Chaohusaurus chaoxianensis}:£ 
Some trees: 
	Char. 229: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Chaohusaurus geishanensis}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 239: 0£→£1 
	Char. 244: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Chaohusaurus zhangjiawanensis}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 18: 0£→£1 
	Char. 23: 1£→£0 
	Char. 39: 0£→£1 
	Char. 198: 0£→£2 
	Char. 277: 1£→£0 
Some trees: 
	Char. 38: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Contectopalatus atavus}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 3: 0£→£1 
	Char. 28: 0£→£1 
	Char. 31: 0£→£1 
	Char. 32: 0£→£1 
	Char. 37: 0£→£1 
	Char. 55: 1£→£0 
	Char. 77: 1£→£0 
	Char. 78: 0£→£1 
	Char. 83: 0£→£1 
	Char. 84: 0£→£1 
	Char. 114: 0£→£1 
	Char. 133: 1£→£0 
	Char. 142: 0£→£1 
	Char. 183: 0£→£1 
	Char. 210: 0£→£1 
	Char. 219: 0£→£1 
	Char. 280: 1£→£2 

£\emph{Cryopterygius kristiansenae}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 58: 1£→£0 
	Char. 77: 1£→£0 
	Char. 82: 1£→£2 
	Char. 119: 1£→£0 
	Char. 128: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Cymbospondylus buchseri}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 65: 0£→£1 
	Char. 80: 0£→£1 
	Char. 158: 0£→£1 
	Char. 179: 0£→£1 
	Char. 182: 2£→£1 

£\emph{Cymbospondylus nichollsi}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 16: 0£→£1 
	Char. 20: 0£→£1 
	Char. 45: 1£→£0 
	Char. 56: 1£→£0 
	Char. 59: 1£→£0 
	Char. 62: 0£→£1 
	Char. 82: 1£→£0 
	Char. 86: 0£→£1 
	Char. 117: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Cymbospondylus petrinus}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 12: 0£→£1 
	Char. 32: 0£→£1 
	Char. 42: 1£→£0 
	Char. 118: 1£→£0 
	Char. 182: 2£→£0 
	Char. 185: 1£→£0 
	Char. 186: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Eurhinosaurus longirostris}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 9: 0£→£1 
	Char. 12: 0£→£1 
	Char. 28: 0£→£1 
	Char. 143: 0£→£1 
	Char. 175: 1£→£0 
	Char. 228: 1£→£0 
	Char. 230: 0£→£1 
	Char. 232: 1£→£0 
	Char. 264: 1£→£0 
	Char. 274: 1£→£2 
	Char. 284: 1£→£0 
	Char. 287: 1£→£2 

£\emph{Excalibosaurus costini}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 25: 1£→£2 
	Char. 205: 0£→£1 
	Char. 217: 0£→£1 
	Char. 249: 2£→£1 
	Char. 256: 1£→£0 
	Char. 273: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Grippia longirostris}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 244: 0£→£1 
	Char. 258: 0£→£1 
	Char. 264: 1£→£0 
Some trees: 
	Char. 9: 1£→£0 
	Char. 230: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Guizhouichthyosaurus tangae}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 12: 0£→£1 
	Char. 38: 1£→£0 
	Char. 48: 0£→£1 
	Char. 182: 1£→£0 
	Char. 221: 0£→£1 
	Char. 223: 1£→£0 
	Char. 229: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Guizhouichthyosaurus wolonggangense}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 3: 0£→£1 
	Char. 31: 0£→£1 
	Char. 39: 0£→£1 
	Char. 40: 0£→£1 
	Char. 41: 0£→£1 
	Char. 49: 1£→£0 
	Char. 55: 1£→£0 
	Char. 186: 0£→£1 
	Char. 220: 2£→£1 
	Char. 232: 1£→£0 
	Char. 236: 2£→£1 
	Char. 243: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Gulosaurus helmi}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 10: 0£→£1 
	Char. 11: 0£→£1 
	Char. 23: 1£→£0 
	Char. 52: 0£→£1 
	Char. 148: 0£→£1 
	Char. 207: 1£→£0 
Some trees: 
	Char. 38: 0£→£1 
	Char. 114: 0£→£1 
	Char. 132: 0£→£2 
	Char. 230: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Hauffiopteryx typicus}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 4: 1£→£0 
	Char. 33: 1£→£0 
	Char. 37: 0£→£1 
	Char. 76: 1£→£0 
	Char. 77: 1£→£0 
	Char. 107: 0£→£1 
	Char. 208: 1£→£0 
	Char. 259: 0£→£1 
	Char. 263: 2£→£1 
	Char. 273: 1£→£0 
	Char. 284: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Hudsonelpidia brevirostris}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 229: 1£→£0 
	Char. 240: 0£→£1 
	Char. 262: 0£→£1 
	Char. 275: 2£→£1 
	Char. 286: 0£→£1 
	Char. 287: 1£→£2 

£\emph{Ichthyosaurus anningae}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 181: 0£→£1 
	Char. 203: 0£→£1 
	Char. 212: 0£→£1 
	Char. 235: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Ichthyosaurus breviceps}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 0: 0£→£1 
	Char. 12: 1£→£0 
	Char. 36: 1£→£0 
	Char. 49: 1£→£0 
	Char. 155: 0£→£1 
	Char. 159: 0£→£1 
	Char. 182: 2£→£1 
	Char. 201: 1£→£0 
	Char. 255: 0£→£1 
	Char. 267: 1£→£0 
	Char. 271: 0£→£1 
	Char. 284: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Ichthyosaurus communis}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 25: 1£→£2 
	Char. 60: 0£→£1 
	Char. 77: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Ichthyosaurus conybeari}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 8: 1£→£0 
	Char. 35: 0£→£1 
	Char. 83: 0£→£1 
	Char. 183: 1£→£0 
	Char. 191: 1£→£0 
	Char. 205: 1£→£0 
	Char. 208: 1£→£0 
	Char. 251: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Janusaurus lundi}:£ 
Some trees: 
	Char. 8: 1£→£0 
	Char. 54: 0£→£1 
	Char. 206: 1£→£0 
	Char. 229: 1£→£0 
	Char. 268: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Leptonectes moorei}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 191: 1£→£0 
	Char. 192: 2£→£1 
	Char. 216: 0£→£1 
	Char. 218: 0£→£1 
	Char. 245: 1£→£2 

£\emph{Leptonectes solei}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 128: 0£→£1 
	Char. 216: 0£→£1 
	Char. 262: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Leptonectes tenuirostris}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 21: 1£→£0 
	Char. 34: 1£→£0 
	Char. 52: 1£→£0 
	Char. 85: 1£→£0 
	Char. 144: 0£→£1 
	Char. 152: 1£→£2 
	Char. 192: 2£→£1 
	Char. 220: 2£→£1 
	Char. 230: 0£→£1 
	Char. 249: 2£→£1 
	Char. 255: 0£→£1 
	Char. 259: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Macgowania janiceps}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 12: 0£→£1 
	Char. 73: 1£→£0 
	Char. 114: 1£→£0 
	Char. 196: 0£→£1 
	Char. 222: 2£→£0 
	Char. 232: 1£→£0 
	Char. 235: 1£→£2 
	Char. 245: 1£→£2 
	Char. 249: 1£→£2 

£\emph{Malawania anachronus}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 194: 1£→£0 
	Char. 205: 0£→£1 
	Char. 211: 0£→£1 
	Char. 212: 1£→£0 
	Char. 225: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Mikadocephalus gracilirostris}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 3: 0£→£1 
	Char. 9: 1£→£0 
	Char. 43: 0£→£1 
	Char. 44: 1£→£0 
	Char. 61: 1£→£2 
	Char. 148: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Mixosaurus cornalianus}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 55: 1£→£0 
	Char. 83: 0£→£1 
	Char. 118: 1£→£0 
	Char. 275: 0£→£1 
	Char. 282: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Mixosaurus kuhnschneyderi}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 20: 0£→£1 
	Char. 75: 0£→£1 
	Char. 117: 1£→£0 
	Char. 163: 0£→£1 
	Char. 166: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Mixosaurus xindianensis}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 11: 0£→£1 
	Char. 31: 0£→£1 
	Char. 148: 1£→£0 
	Char. 217: 0£→£1 
	Char. 223: 1£→£0 
	Char. 245: 0£→£1 
	Char. 248: 1£→£0 
	Char. 256: 0£→£1 
	Char. 271: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Mollesaurus periallus}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 31: 0£→£1 
	Char. 32: 1£→£0 
	Char. 80: 1£→£0 
	Char. 82: 1£→£2 

£\emph{Muiscasaurus catheti}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 4: 1£→£0 
	Char. 12: 1£→£0 
	Char. 14: 1£→£0 
	Char. 142: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Nannopterygius enthekiodon}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 0: 0£→£1 
	Char. 186: 1£→£0 
	Char. 193: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Ophthalmosaurus icenicus}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 1: 1£→£0 
	Char. 39: 1£→£0 
	Char. 41: 0£→£1 
	Char. 105: 1£→£0 
	Char. 109: 1£→£0 
	Char. 193: 1£→£0 
	Char. 232: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Ophthalmosaurus natans}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 14: 1£→£0 
	Char. 38: 1£→£0 
	Char. 45: 0£→£1 
	Char. 65: 1£→£0 
	Char. 101: 1£→£0 
	Char. 119: 1£→£0 
	Char. 143: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Ophthalmosaurus yasykovi}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 193: 0£→£1 
	Char. 211: 1£→£0 
	Char. 246: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Palvennia hoybergeti}:£ 
Some trees: 
	Char. 100: 1£→£0 
	Char. 128: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Paraophthalmosaurus sevaljeviensis}:£ 
All trees: 
No autapomorphies: 

£\emph{Paraophthalmosaurus kabanovi}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 188: 1£→£0 
	Char. 189: 0£→£1 
	Char. 192: 2£→£1 
	Char. 205: 1£→£0 
	Char. 208: 1£→£0 
	Char. 235: 1£→£0 
	Char. 272: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Parvinatator wapitiensis}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 25: 0£→£1 
	Char. 35: 0£→£1 
	Char. 77: 0£→£1 
	Char. 248: 0£→£1 
Some trees: 
	Char. 230: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Pervushovisaurus bannovkensis}:£ 
All trees: 
No autapomorphies: 

£\emph{Pessopteryx nisseri}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 191: 0£→£1 
	Char. 193: 0£→£1 
	Char. 194: 0£→£1 
	Char. 211: 0£→£1 
	Char. 221: 0£→£1 
	Char. 278: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Phalarodon callawayi}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 3: 0£→£1 
	Char. 163: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Phalarodon fraasi}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 12: 0£→£1 
	Char. 17: 0£→£1 
	Char. 28: 0£→£1 
	Char. 36: 1£→£0 
	Char. 40: 0£→£1 
	Char. 70: 0£→£1 
	Char. 77: 1£→£0 
	Char. 116: 0£→£1 
	Char. 117: 1£→£0 
	Char. 132: 0£→£2 
	Char. 133: 1£→£0 
	Char. 135: 1£→£0 
	Char. 147: 0£→£2 
	Char. 157: 1£→£2 
	Char. 158: 0£→£1 
	Char. 176: 0£→£1 
	Char. 188: 0£→£1 
	Char. 222: 2£→£0 

£\emph{Phalarodon major}:£ 
All trees: 
No autapomorphies: 

£\emph{Phantomosaurus neubigi}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 51: 0£→£1 
	Char. 99: 0£→£1 
	Char. 103: 0£→£1 
	Char. 107: 0£→£1 
	Char. 118: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Platypterygius hercynicus}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 94: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Platypterygius ochevi}:£ 
Some trees: 
	Char. 204: 1£→£0 
	Char. 249: 1£→£2 

£\emph{Platypterygius platydactylus}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 81: 0£→£1 
	Char. 161: 0£→£1 
	Char. 182: 2£→£1 
	Char. 218: 1£→£2 
	Char. 219: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Platypterygius sachicarum}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 120: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Qianichthyosaurus xingyiensis}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 9: 0£→£1 
	Char. 25: 1£→£0 
	Char. 31: 0£→£1 
	Char. 37: 0£→£1 
	Char. 184: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Qianichthyosaurus zhoui}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 0: 0£→£1 
	Char. 57: 1£→£0 
	Char. 198: 1£→£2 
	Char. 202: 0£→£1 
	Char. 205: 0£→£1 
	Char. 235: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Shastasaurus alexandrae}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 52: 0£→£1 
	Char. 157: 0£→£1 
	Char. 181: 0£→£1 
	Char. 187: 0£→£1 
	Char. 216: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Shastasaurus liangae}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 48: 0£→£1 
	Char. 49: 1£→£0 
	Char. 75: 1£→£0 
	Char. 158: 0£→£1 
	Char. 220: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Shastasaurus pacificus}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 160: 0£→£2 

£\emph{Shastasaurus sikkaniensis}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 20: 0£→£1 
	Char. 74: 0£→£1 
	Char. 114: 0£→£1 
	Char. 153: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Shonisaurus popularis}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 7: 0£→£1 
	Char. 8: 0£→£1 
	Char. 10: 0£→£1 
	Char. 12: 0£→£1 
	Char. 14: 0£→£1 
	Char. 25: 1£→£0 
	Char. 34: 1£→£0 
	Char. 81: 0£→£1 
	Char. 122: 1£→£0 
	Char. 124: 1£→£0 
	Char. 128: 0£→£1 
	Char. 158: 0£→£1 
	Char. 159: 1£→£0 
	Char. 164: 1£→£0 
	Char. 182: 12£→£0 
	Char. 210: 0£→£1 
	Char. 221: 0£→£1 
	Char. 223: 1£→£0 
	Char. 235: 0£→£1 
	Char. 273: 0£→£1 
	Char. 279: 0£→£1 
	Char. 281: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Simbirskiasaurus birjukovi}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 25: 2£→£3 
	Char. 42: 0£→£1 
	Char. 98: 0£→£1 
	Char. 145: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Sisteronia seeleyi}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 144: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Stenopterygius quadriscissus}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 55: 0£→£1 
	Char. 78: 1£→£0 
	Char. 217: 0£→£1 
	Char. 288: 1£→£2 

£\emph{Stenopterygius triscissus}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 14: 1£→£0 
	Char. 33: 1£→£0 
	Char. 177: 1£→£2 
	Char. 184: 0£→£1 
	Char. 208: 1£→£0 
	Char. 270: 1£→£0 
	Char. 277: 1£→£2 

£\emph{Stenopterygius uniter}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 205: 0£→£1 
	Char. 286: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Suevoleviathan disinteger}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 14: 1£→£0 
	Char. 60: 0£→£1 
	Char. 117: 1£→£0 
	Char. 130: 1£→£0 
	Char. 208: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Suevoleviathan integer}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 58: 1£→£0 
	Char. 118: 1£→£0 
	Char. 184: 0£→£1 
	Char. 211: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Sveltonectes insolitus}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 8: 1£→£0 
	Char. 9: 1£→£0 
	Char. 25: 2£→£0 
	Char. 35: 0£→£1 
	Char. 39: 1£→£0 
	Char. 40: 0£→£1 
	Char. 53: 0£→£1 
	Char. 61: 2£→£1 
	Char. 101: 1£→£0 
	Char. 199: 1£→£0 
	Char. 229: 1£→£0 
	Char. 241: 1£→£0 
	Char. 247: 0£→£1 
	Char. 260: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Temnodontosaurus azerguensis}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 127: 0£→£1 
	Char. 133: 1£→£0 
	Char. 135: 1£→£0 
	Char. 211: 0£→£1 
	Char. 219: 1£→£0 
	Char. 226: 0£→£1 
	Char. 228: 1£→£0 
	Char. 229: 1£→£0 
	Char. 246: 0£→£1 
	Char. 268: 0£→£1 
	Char. 270: 0£→£1 
	Char. 274: 1£→£2 
	Char. 278: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Temnodontosaurus platyodon}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 70: 1£→£0 
	Char. 84: 0£→£1 
	Char. 101: 1£→£0 
	Char. 142: 1£→£0 
	Char. 211: 0£→£1 
	Char. 229: 1£→£0 
	Char. 231: 1£→£0 
	Char. 253: 2£→£1 
	Char. 288: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Temnodontosaurus trigonodon}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 76: 1£→£0 
	Char. 77: 1£→£0 
	Char. 78: 1£→£0 
	Char. 86: 1£→£0 
	Char. 97: 1£→£0 
	Char. 99: 0£→£1 
	Char. 235: 1£→£0 
	Char. 243: 1£→£0 
	Char. 245: 2£→£1 
	Char. 249: 2£→£1 
	Char. 259: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Thalattoarchon saurophagis}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 267: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Toretocnemus californicus}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 230: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Toretocnemus zitteli}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 227: 0£→£1 
	Char. 231: 0£→£1 
	Char. 279: 0£→£1 
	Char. 286: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Undorosaurus gorodischensis}:£ 
Some trees: 
	Char. 210: 1£→£0 
	Char. 211: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Undorosaurus trautscholdi}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 213: 0£→£1 
	Char. 245: 1£→£2 

£\emph{Utatsusaurus hataii}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 69: 1£→£0 
	Char. 71: 1£→£0 
	Char. 122: 1£→£0 
	Char. 139: 1£→£0 
	Char. 232: 1£→£0 
Some trees: 
	Char. 9: 1£→£0 
	Char. 42: 1£→£0 
	Char. 219: 0£→£1 

£\emph{Wimanius odontopalatus}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 6: 0£→£1 
	Char. 31: 0£→£1 
	Char. 132: 0£→£1 
	Char. 138: 1£→£0 

£\emph{Xinminosaurus catactes}:£ 
All trees: 
	Char. 132: 0£→£1 
	Char. 148: 0£→£2 
```

### Synapomorphies

``` {basicstyle="\\ttfamily\\footnotesize" breaklines="true" extendedchars="true" multicols="2" texcl="true" escapechar="£" numbers="none"}
Node 92: 
All trees: 
	Char. 224: 0£→£1 

Node 93: 
All trees: 
	Char. 210: 0£→£1 
	Char. 212: 0£→£1 

Node 94: 
All trees: 
	Char. 193: 1£→£0 
	Char. 246: 0£→£1 

Node 95: 
All trees: 
	Char. 19: 0£→£1 
	Char. 70: 1£→£0 
	Char. 84: 0£→£1 
	Char. 143: 0£→£1 
	Char. 240: 0£→£1 
	Char. 259: 0£→£1 
	Char. 286: 0£→£1 

Node 96: 
All trees: 
	Char. 100: 0£→£1 
	Char. 206: 0£→£1 
	Char. 216: 0£→£1 
	Char. 241: 0£→£1 

Node 97: 
All trees: 
	Char. 1: 0£→£1 
	Char. 96: 0£→£1 
	Char. 215: 0£→£1 
	Char. 245: 2£→£1 
	Char. 249: 2£→£1 

Node 98: 
All trees: 
	Char. 145: 0£→£1 
	Char. 181: 0£→£1 
	Char. 201: 1£→£0 
	Char. 203: 0£→£1 
	Char. 225: 1£→£0 
	Char. 255: 0£→£1 
	Char. 270: 0£→£1 

Node 99: 
All trees: 
	Char. 25: 1£→£2 
	Char. 53: 1£→£0 
	Char. 65: 0£→£1 
	Char. 105: 0£→£1 
	Char. 177: 2£→£1 
	Char. 268: 0£→£1 

Node 100: 
All trees: 
	Char. 12: 0£→£1 
	Char. 14: 0£→£1 
	Char. 20: 0£→£1 
	Char. 35: 1£→£0 
	Char. 70: 0£→£1 
	Char. 83: 1£→£0 

Node 101: 
All trees: 
	Char. 0: 1£→£0 
	Char. 67: 1£→£0 
	Char. 84: 1£→£0 
	Char. 97: 0£→£1 
	Char. 151: 1£→£0 
	Char. 181: 1£→£0 
	Char. 269: 0£→£1 

Node 102: 
All trees: 
	Char. 1: 1£→£0 
	Char. 39: 0£→£1 
	Char. 78: 0£→£1 
	Char. 114: 1£→£0 
	Char. 212: 1£→£0 
	Char. 245: 1£→£2 

Node 103: 
All trees: 
	Char. 6: 0£→£1 
	Char. 10: 0£→£1 
	Char. 35: 0£→£1 
	Char. 159: 1£→£0 
	Char. 175: 0£→£1 
	Char. 177: 1£→£2 

Node 104: 
All trees: 
	Char. 233: 0£→£1 

Node 105: 
All trees: 
	Char. 208: 0£→£1 
	Char. 249: 1£→£2 

Node 106: 
All trees: 
	Char. 0: 0£→£1 
	Char. 83: 0£→£1 
	Char. 247: 0£→£1 

Node 107: 
All trees: 
	Char. 158: 0£→£1 
	Char. 176: 0£→£1 
	Char. 191: 0£→£1 
	Char. 221: 0£→£1 
	Char. 231: 0£→£1 

Node 108: 
All trees: 
	Char. 193: 0£→£1 
	Char. 198: 1£→£2 
	Char. 257: 0£→£1 
	Char. 258: 0£→£1 
	Char. 281: 0£→£1 

Node 109: 
All trees: 
	Char. 129: 1£→£2 
	Char. 162: 1£→£0 

Node 110: 
All trees: 
	Char. 264: 1£→£0 

Node 111: 
All trees: 
	Char. 1: 0£→£1 
	Char. 55: 1£→£0 
	Char. 76: 0£→£1 
	Char. 84: 0£→£1 
	Char. 142: 0£→£1 

Node 112: 
All trees: 
	Char. 9: 1£→£0 
	Char. 114: 0£→£1 

Node 113: 
All trees: 
	Char. 32: 0£→£1 
	Char. 94: 0£→£1 
	Char. 126: 0£→£1 
	Char. 183: 0£→£1 
	Char. 217: 0£→£1 
	Char. 274: 0£→£1 
	Char. 284: 0£→£1 

Node 114: 
All trees: 
	Char. 75: 0£→£1 
	Char. 88: 0£→£1 
	Char. 102: 1£→£0 
	Char. 180: 1£→£2 
	Char. 198: 0£→£1 
	Char. 236: 1£→£2 
	Char. 240: 1£→£0 
	Char. 243: 0£→£1 
	Char. 245: 0£→£1 
	Char. 246: 0£→£1 
	Char. 249: 0£→£1 
	Char. 283: 0£→£1 
	Char. 288: 0£→£1 

Node 115: 
All trees: 
	Char. 38: 0£→£1 
	Char. 267: 0£→£1 

Node 116: 
All trees: 
	Char. 40: 1£→£0 
	Char. 41: 1£→£0 
	Char. 277: 1£→£0 

Node 117: 
All trees: 
	Char. 56: 0£→£1 
	Char. 59: 0£→£1 
	Char. 129: 0£→£1 
	Char. 192: 0£→£1 

Node 118: 
All trees: 
	Char. 34: 0£→£1 
	Char. 36: 0£→£1 
	Char. 49: 0£→£1 
	Char. 82: 0£→£1 
	Char. 225: 0£→£1 
Some trees: 
	Char. 45: 0£→£1 
	Char. 65: 1£→£0 

Node 119: 
All trees: 
	Char. 40: 0£→£1 
	Char. 41: 0£→£1 
Some trees: 
	Char. 261: 0£→£1 

Node 120: 
All trees: 
	Char. 31: 1£→£0 
	Char. 73: 0£→£1 
	Char. 267: 1£→£0 
Some trees: 
	Char. 36: 1£→£0 
	Char. 38: 1£→£0 
	Char. 159: 0£→£1 
	Char. 231: 1£→£0 
	Char. 235: 1£→£0 

Node 121: 
All trees: 
No synapomorphies 

Node 122: 
All trees: 
	Char. 251: 0£→£1 

Node 123: 
All trees: 
	Char. 142: 1£→£0 

Node 124: 
All trees: 
	Char. 1: 1£→£0 

Node 125: 
All trees: 
	Char. 105: 1£→£0 
	Char. 114: 0£→£1 
	Char. 154: 1£→£0 
	Char. 232: 1£→£0 

Node 126: 
All trees: 
	Char. 106: 0£→£1 
	Char. 249: 1£→£2 

Node 127: 
Some trees: 
	Char. 12: 1£→£0 
	Char. 52: 1£→£0 
	Char. 53: 0£→£1 
	Char. 112: 0£→£1 
	Char. 204: 0£→£1 

Node 128: 
All trees: 
	Char. 55: 0£→£1 
	Char. 205: 1£→£0 
	Char. 212: 0£→£1 

Node 129: 
All trees: 
	Char. 155: 0£→£1 
	Char. 208: 1£→£0 
	Char. 210: 0£→£1 

Node 130: 
All trees: 
	Char. 83: 0£→£1 
	Char. 142: 1£→£0 

Node 131: 
All trees: 
	Char. 10: 1£→£0 
	Char. 29: 0£→£1 
	Char. 41: 1£→£0 

Node 132: 
All trees: 
	Char. 25: 1£→£0 
	Char. 34: 0£→£1 
	Char. 187: 0£→£1 
	Char. 228: 0£→£1 

Node 133: 
All trees: 
	Char. 12: 0£→£1 
	Char. 118: 1£→£0 
	Char. 205: 0£→£1 

Node 134: 
All trees: 
	Char. 58: 0£→£1 
	Char. 77: 0£→£1 
	Char. 136: 0£→£1 
	Char. 157: 0£→£1 
	Char. 192: 1£→£0 
	Char. 264: 1£→£0 

Node 135: 
All trees: 
	Char. 1: 0£→£1 
	Char. 13: 0£→£1 
	Char. 34: 1£→£0 
	Char. 62: 0£→£1 
	Char. 74: 0£→£1 
	Char. 148: 0£→£1 
	Char. 155: 0£→£1 
	Char. 263: 1£→£0 

Node 136: 
All trees: 
	Char. 32: 0£→£1 
	Char. 128: 0£→£1 

Node 137: 
All trees: 
	Char. 0: 0£→£1 
	Char. 13: 0£→£1 
	Char. 16: 0£→£1 
	Char. 70: 0£→£1 
	Char. 220: 0£→£2 

Node 138: 
All trees: 
	Char. 192: 1£→£0 
	Char. 253: 0£→£1 
	Char. 257: 0£→£1 
	Char. 258: 0£→£1 

Node 139: 
All trees: 
	Char. 218: 0£→£1 
	Char. 219: 1£→£0 
	Char. 223: 1£→£0 
	Char. 233: 0£→£1 

Node 140: 
All trees: 
	Char. 235: 0£→£1 
	Char. 259: 0£→£1 
	Char. 267: 1£→£0 

Node 141: 
All trees: 
	Char. 37: 1£→£0 

Node 142: 
All trees: 
	Char. 146: 0£→£1 

Node 143: 
All trees: 
	Char. 8: 1£→£0 
	Char. 99: 2£→£1 

Node 144: 
All trees: 
	Char. 34: 0£→£1 
	Char. 60: 0£→£1 
	Char. 84: 0£→£1 
	Char. 176: 0£→£1 
	Char. 225: 0£→£1 
	Char. 281: 0£→£1 

Node 145: 
All trees: 
	Char. 10: 0£→£1 
	Char. 148: 0£→£1 
	Char. 236: 1£→£2 
	Char. 247: 0£→£1 
Some trees: 
	Char. 71: 1£→£0 
	Char. 152: 0£→£1 

Node 146: 
All trees: 
	Char. 8: 1£→£0 

Node 147: 
All trees: 
	Char. 51: 0£→£1 
	Char. 55: 1£→£0 
	Char. 177: 0£→£1 
	Char. 187: 0£→£1 
	Char. 195: 0£→£1 
	Char. 196: 0£→£1 
	Char. 198: 0£→£2 

Node 148: 
All trees: 
	Char. 49: 1£→£0 
	Char. 61: 1£→£0 

Node 149: 
All trees: 
	Char. 65: 0£→£1 
	Char. 113: 0£→£1 
	Char. 128: 0£→£1 
	Char. 219: 1£→£0 
	Char. 246: 0£→£1 
	Char. 257: 1£→£0 
	Char. 272: 1£→£0 

Node 150: 
All trees: 
	Char. 20: 0£→£1 
	Char. 22: 0£→£1 
	Char. 25: 1£→£0 
	Char. 58: 0£→£1 
	Char. 89: 0£→£1 
	Char. 117: 1£→£0 

Node 151: 
All trees: 
	Char. 9: 0£→£1 
	Char. 202: 0£→£1 

Node 152: 
All trees: 
	Char. 65: 0£→£1 
	Char. 137: 0£→£1 
	Char. 142: 1£→£0 

Node 153: 
All trees: 
	Char. 33: 1£→£0 
	Char. 185: 1£→£0 
	Char. 205: 0£→£1 
	Char. 228: 1£→£0 
	Char. 232: 1£→£0 
	Char. 259: 0£→£1 
	Char. 270: 0£→£1 
	Char. 274: 1£→£2 
	Char. 282: 2£→£1 
	Char. 283: 1£→£0 
	Char. 287: 1£→£2 
	Char. 288: 1£→£2 

Node 154: 
All trees: 
	Char. 69: 0£→£1 
	Char. 216: 0£→£1 
	Char. 240: 0£→£1 
	Char. 251: 0£→£1 

Node 155: 
All trees: 
	Char. 28: 0£→£1 
	Char. 203: 0£→£1 
	Char. 232: 1£→£0 

Node 156: 
All trees: 
	Char. 32: 0£→£1 
	Char. 33: 0£→£1 
	Char. 69: 1£→£0 
	Char. 120: 0£→£1 
	Char. 163: 0£→£1 
	Char. 274: 0£→£1 

Node 157: 
All trees: 
	Char. 115: 0£→£1 
	Char. 171: 0£→£1 
	Char. 237: 0£→£1 
	Char. 250: 1£→£0 

Node 158: 
All trees: 
	Char. 208: 0£→£1 
	Char. 228: 1£→£0 
	Char. 240: 0£→£1 

Node 159: 
All trees: 
	Char. 224: 0£→£1 

Node 160: 
All trees: 
	Char. 201: 0£→£1 
	Char. 222: 2£→£0 

Node 161: 
All trees: 
	Char. 201: 0£→£1 
Some trees: 
	Char. 65: 1£→£0 
	Char. 231: 0£→£1 

Node 162: 
All trees: 
	Char. 142: 1£→£0 

Node 163: 
All trees: 
	Char. 111: 0£→£1 
	Char. 213: 0£→£1 

Node 164: 
All trees: 
	Char. 187: 0£→£1 
	Char. 201: 0£→£1 
	Char. 226: 0£→£1 
	Char. 245: 1£→£2 

Node 165: 
All trees: 
	Char. 141: 1£→£0 

Node 166: 
All trees: 
	Char. 59: 1£→£0 
	Char. 74: 0£→£1 
	Char. 83: 0£→£1 
	Char. 222: 2£→£1 
	Char. 229: 1£→£0 

Node 167: 
All trees: 
	Char. 24: 0£→£1 
	Char. 40: 0£→£1 
	Char. 45: 1£→£0 
	Char. 56: 1£→£0 
	Char. 57: 1£→£0 
	Char. 59: 1£→£0 
	Char. 115: 0£→£1 
	Char. 159: 1£→£0 
	Char. 221: 0£→£1 
	Char. 229: 1£→£0 

Node 168: 
All trees: 
	Char. 1: 0£→£1 
	Char. 38: 1£→£0 
	Char. 177: 0£→£1 

Node 169: 
All trees: 
	Char. 15: 1£→£0 
	Char. 41: 0£→£1 
	Char. 55: 1£→£0 
	Char. 76: 0£→£1 
	Char. 77: 0£→£1 

Node 170: 
All trees: 
	Char. 4: 1£→£0 
	Char. 5: 0£→£1 
	Char. 12: 1£→£0 
	Char. 76: 1£→£0 
	Char. 80: 1£→£0 
	Char. 92: 1£→£0 
	Char. 101: 1£→£0 
	Char. 111: 0£→£1 
	Char. 251: 0£→£1 
	Char. 267: 1£→£0 
	Char. 287: 1£→£2 

Node 171: 
All trees: 
	Char. 15: 1£→£0 
	Char. 83: 0£→£1 

Node 172: 
All trees: 
	Char. 72: 1£→£0 
	Char. 84: 0£→£1 
	Char. 142: 1£→£2 
	Char. 233: 1£→£0 
	Char. 245: 2£→£1 
	Char. 249: 2£→£1 

Node 173: 
All trees: 
	Char. 29: 0£→£1 
	Char. 30: 0£→£1 
	Char. 58: 1£→£0 
	Char. 60: 0£→£1 
	Char. 72: 1£→£0 
	Char. 147: 0£→£2 
	Char. 175: 1£→£0 
	Char. 182: 2£→£1 
	Char. 246: 0£→£1 
	Char. 269: 1£→£0 
	Char. 273: 1£→£0 
	Char. 278: 1£→£0 

Node 174: 
All trees: 
	Char. 147: 0£→£2 

Node 175: 
All trees: 
	Char. 245: 1£→£0 
	Char. 249: 1£→£0 
	Char. 250: 1£→£0 
	Char. 272: 0£→£1 
	Char. 277: 0£→£1
```

Bayes factor hypothesis testing {#appB:Bayesfactors}
-------------------------------

Marginal likelihoods were calculated in MrBayes v. 3.2.6 [@Ronquist2012]
using the stepping-stone method
([\[TblB:MarginalLikelihoods\]](#TblB:MarginalLikelihoods){reference-type="ref"
reference="TblB:MarginalLikelihoods"}; see
[2.3.4.4](#sys:MethodsBayesian){reference-type="ref"
reference="sys:MethodsBayesian"}). These were used to compare between
the equal- and gamma-rates state transformation priors analyses. Bayes
factors are compared using the criteria of @Kass1995. There is strong
evidence to support the alternative hypothesis *H*~1~, in this case the
gamma rates prior distribution.

llSSSS

\
& *H*~0~ &\
(lr)3-4 *H*~1~ & & Equal & Gamma & Maximum Parsimony & Maximum
likelihood\
& -6402.80 & **-6316.50 & -7230.19 & -7225.45\
Bayesian inference & Equal & − & & &\
& Gamma & **-86.30 & − &\
& 827.39 & 913.16 & − &\
& 822.65 & 908.95 & **-4.74 & −\
******

Supplementary data to Chapter 3 {#appendix:Macroevolution}
===============================

Additional figures
------------------

![Contribution of Eigenvector and principal coordinate axes to variance
in the cladistic morphospace plots. The first few axes contribute
relative more and the last few axes relatively less to the variance than
the middle majority. See also [\[tbl305\]](#tbl305){reference-type="ref"
reference="tbl305"}.
[\[fig:cladistic-disparity-scree\]]{#fig:cladistic-disparity-scree
label="fig:cladistic-disparity-scree"}](./img/fig-disparity-scree.pdf){#fig:cladistic-disparity-scree
width="70%"}

![Rarefaction curves of ichthyosaur disparity in each of six time bins,
calculated from the principal coordinate output of MATRIX in RARE. The
disparity metric used i mean sum of ranges drawn from 1000 bootstrap
replicates using all axes; 95% confidence intervals are marked in grey.
Only taxa more than 20% complete were included.
[\[fig:rare-MSR\]]{#fig:rare-MSR
label="fig:rare-MSR"}](./img/fig-rare-msr.pdf){#fig:rare-MSR
height="0.3\\textheight"}

![Rarefaction curves of ichthyosaur disparity in each of six time bins,
calculated from the principal coordinate output of MATRIX in RARE. The
disparity metric used i mean product of ranges scaled to a single
dimension drawn from 1000 bootstrap replicates using all axes; 95%
confidence intervals are marked in grey. Only taxa more than 20%
complete were included. [\[fig:rare-MPR\]]{#fig:rare-MPR
label="fig:rare-MPR"}](./img/fig-rare-mpr.pdf){#fig:rare-MPR
height="0.3\\textheight"}

![Rarefaction curves of ichthyosaur disparity in each of six time bins,
calculated from the principal coordinate output of MATRIX in RARE. The
disparity metric used is mean product of variances scaled to a single
dimension drawn from 1000 bootstrap replicates using all axes; 95%
confidence intervals are marked in grey. Only taxa more than 20%
complete were included. [\[fig:rare-MPV\]]{#fig:rare-MPV
label="fig:rare-MPV"}](./img/fig-rare-mpv.pdf){#fig:rare-MPV
height="0.3\\textheight"}

![Rates of change in ichthyosaur body length across phylogeny for nine
randomly selected MPTs from the parsimony analysis. These trees were
used to compare to the main tree in
[3.8](#fig:bodysize-rate){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:bodysize-rate"}. Branches are scaled and coloured to
indicate rate of change: blue represents lower and red higher rates of
evolution. [\[fig:bodysize-ratetrees\]]{#fig:bodysize-ratetrees
label="fig:bodysize-ratetrees"}](./img/fig-body-rates.pdf "fig:"){#fig:bodysize-ratetrees
width="\\textwidth"} [\[fig:bodya\]]{#fig:bodya label="fig:bodya"}
[\[fig:bodyb\]]{#fig:bodyb label="fig:bodyb"} [\[fig:bodyc\]]{#fig:bodyc
label="fig:bodyc"} [\[fig:bodyd\]]{#fig:bodyd label="fig:bodyd"}
[\[fig:bodye\]]{#fig:bodye label="fig:bodye"} [\[fig:bodyf\]]{#fig:bodyf
label="fig:bodyf"} [\[fig:bodyg\]]{#fig:bodyg label="fig:bodyg"}
[\[fig:bodyh\]]{#fig:bodyh label="fig:bodyh"} [\[fig:bodyi\]]{#fig:bodyi
label="fig:bodyi"}

![Rates of change in ichthyosaur skull length across phylogeny for nine
randomly selected MPTs from the parsimony analysis. These trees were
used to compare to the main tree in
[3.9](#fig:skullsize-rate){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:skullsize-rate"}. Branches are scaled and coloured to
indicate rate of change: blue represents lower and red higher rates of
evolution. [\[fig:skullsize-ratetrees\]]{#fig:skullsize-ratetrees
label="fig:skullsize-ratetrees"}](./img/fig-skull-rates.pdf "fig:"){#fig:skullsize-ratetrees
width="\\textwidth"} [\[fig:skulla\]]{#fig:skulla label="fig:skulla"}
[\[fig:skullb\]]{#fig:skullb label="fig:skullb"}
[\[fig:skullc\]]{#fig:skullc label="fig:skullc"}
[\[fig:skulld\]]{#fig:skulld label="fig:skulld"}
[\[fig:skulle\]]{#fig:skulle label="fig:skulle"}
[\[fig:skullf\]]{#fig:skullf label="fig:skullf"}
[\[fig:skullg\]]{#fig:skullg label="fig:skullg"}
[\[fig:skullh\]]{#fig:skullh label="fig:skullh"}
[\[fig:skulli\]]{#fig:skulli label="fig:skulli"}

![Rates of change in McGowan's [-@McGowan1976] ichthyosaur orbital ratio
across phylogeny for nine randomly selected MPTs from the parsimony
analysis. These trees were used to compare to the main tree in
[3.10](#fig:orbitsize-rate){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:orbitsize-rate"}. Branches are scaled and coloured to
indicate rate of change: blue represents lower and red higher rates of
evolution. [\[fig:orbitsize-ratetrees\]]{#fig:orbitsize-ratetrees
label="fig:orbitsize-ratetrees"}](./img/fig-orbit-rates.pdf "fig:"){#fig:orbitsize-ratetrees
width="\\textwidth"} [\[fig:orbita\]]{#fig:orbita label="fig:orbita"}
[\[fig:orbitb\]]{#fig:orbitb label="fig:orbitb"}
[\[fig:orbitc\]]{#fig:orbitc label="fig:orbitc"}
[\[fig:orbitd\]]{#fig:orbitd label="fig:orbitd"}
[\[fig:orbite\]]{#fig:orbite label="fig:orbite"}
[\[fig:orbitf\]]{#fig:orbitf label="fig:orbitf"}
[\[fig:orbitg\]]{#fig:orbitg label="fig:orbitg"}
[\[fig:orbith\]]{#fig:orbith label="fig:orbith"}
[\[fig:orbiti\]]{#fig:orbiti label="fig:orbiti"}

Data tables
-----------

\>ll\>X\[1.5l\]cSSX\[l\]

\
& &\
(lr)3-4 *Taxon* & Stage range & *Index fossil* & A/C & FAD (Ma) & LAD
(Ma) & References\

\
& &\
(lr)3-4 *Taxon* & Stage range & *Index fossil* & A/C & FAD (Ma) & LAD
(Ma) & References\
Acamptonectes densus & Hauterivian & Simbiskites concinnus/staffi & A &
132.9 & 129.4 & [@Fischer2012]\
Aegirosaurus leptospondylus & Kimmeridge--Tithonian & & & 153.96 &
149.87 & [@Bardet2000]\
Arthropterygius chrisorum & Oxfordian--Kimmeridgian & & & 163.47 &
152.06 & [@Maxwell2010]\
Athabascasaurus bitumineus & Albian & & & 113 & 111.5 &
[@Druckenmiller2010]\
Barracudasauroides panxianensis & Anisian & Nicoraella germanicus & C &
244.94 & 243.99 & [@Jiang2006]\
Besanosaurus leptorhynchus & Anisian & Nevadites & C & 242.1 & 241.5 &
[@DalSasso1996]\
Brachypterygius alekseevi & Tithonian & Dorsoplanites panderi & A &
149.6 & 147.9 & [@Arkhangelsky2001]\
Brachypterygius extremus & Tithonian & Pectinatites
wheatleyensis--P. hudlestoni & A & 151 & 150 &
[\[chapter1\]](#chapter1){reference-type="ref" reference="chapter1"}\
Brachypterygius pseudoscythica & Tithonian & Ilowaiskya pseudoscythica &
A & 150.1 & 149.5 & [@Efimov1998]\
Californosaurus perrini & Carnian & & & 233.5 & 228.35 &
[@Merriam1902; @Merriam1908]\
Callawayia neoscapularis & Norian & Epigondolella triangularis & C &
221.5 & 217.5 & [@McGowan1994a]\
Cartorhynchus lenticarpus & Olenekian & Subcolumbites & A & 247.9 &
247.71 & [@Motani2014a]\
Caypullisaurus bonapartei & Tithonian--Berriasian & Virgatosphinactes
mendozanus & A & 152.1 & 139.4 & [@Fernandez1997a]\
Chacaicosaurus cayi & Bajocian & Emileia giebeli & A & 170.3 & 169.45 &
[@Fernandez1994]\
Chaohusaurus chaoxianensis & Olenekian & Procolumbites--Subcolumbites &
A & 248.09 & 247.71 & [@Motani2014; @Motani2015]\
Chaohusaurus geishanensis & Olenekian & Procolumbites--Subcolumbites & A
& 248.09 & 247.71 & [@Motani2014a; @Motani2015]\
Chaohusaurus zhangjiawanensis & Olenekian & Neospathodus
homeri--N. triangularis & C & 247.9 & 247.1 & [@Chen2013]\
Contectopalatus atavus & Anisian & & & 244.94 & 241.5 & [@Liu2013]\
Cryopterygius kristiansenae & Tithonian & Dorsoplanites
ilovaiskyi--D. maximus & A & 148.3 & 147.4 & [@Druckenmiller2012a]\
Cymbospondylus buchseri & Anisian--Ladinian & & & 242.57 & 240.3 &
[@Sander1989]\
Cymbospondylus nichollsi & Anisian & & & 243.99 & 243.05 &
[@Frobisch2006]\
Cymbospondylus petrinus & Anisian & Paragondolella excelsa & C & 243.99
& 241.5 & [@Merriam1908]\
Cymbospondylus piscosus & Anisian & & & 247.1 & 241.5 & [@Merriam1908]\
Dearcmhara schawcrossi & Toarcian--Bajocian & Pleydellia
aalensis--Stephanoceras humphriesianum & A & 174.43 & 169.45 &
[@Brusatte2015]\
Eurhinosaurus longirostris & Toarcian & Dactylioceras
tenuicostatus--Harpoceras falsiferum & A & 182.7 & 180.81 &
[@Huene1951; @McGowan1986]\
Excalibosaurus costini & Sinemurian & Arietites bucklandi & A & 199.3 &
197.8 & [@McGowan2003; @McGowan1986]\
Grippia longirostris & Olenekian & Subcolumbites & A & 247.9 & 247.71 &
[@Motani2000]\
Guizhouichthyosaurus tangae & Carnian & & & 233.5 & 228.35 & [@Pan2006]\
Guizhouichthyosaurus wolonggangense & Carnian & & & 233.5 & 228.35 &
[@Chen2007]\
Gulosaurus helmi & Olenekian--Anisian & & & 247.7 & 247.1 &
[@Brinkman1992; @Cuthbertson2013a]\
Hauffiopteryx typicus & Toarcian & Dactylioceras
tenuicostatus--Harpoceras falsiferum & A & 182.7 & 181.25 &
[@Maisch2008b; @Caine2011; @Marek2015]\
Himalayasaurus tibetensis & Norian & & & 228.4 & 209.5 & [@Motani1999a]\
Hudsonelpidia brevirostris & Norian & Epigondolella quadrata & C & 226.5
& 221.25 & [@McGowan1995]\
Hupehsuchus nanchangensis & Olenekian & Subcolumbites & A & 247.9 &
247.71 & [@Carroll1991]\
Ichthyosaurus acutirostris & Toarcian & & & 180.36 & 175.6 &
[@McGowan2003]\
Ichthyosaurus anningae & Sinemurian--Pliensbachian & Asteroceras
obtusum?--Uptonia jamesoni & A & 195.31 & 189.35 & [@Lomax2015]\
Ichthyosaurus breviceps & Hettangian--Sinemurian & Schlotheimia
angulata--Arnioceras semicostatum & A & 200.1 & 196.31 &
[@McGowan1974a]\
Ichthyosaurus communis & Hettangian--Sinemurian &
Pre-Planorbis--Arnioceras semicostatum & A & 201.3 & 196.31 &
[@McGowan1974a]\
Ichthyosaurus conybeari & Hettangian--Sinemurian & Schlotheimia
angulata--Arnioceras semicostatum & A & 200.1 & 196.31 &
[@McGowan1974a]\
Isfjordosaurus minor & Olenekian & & & 247.7 & 247.1 & [@Wiman1910]\
Janusaurus lundi & Tithonian & & & 148.3 & 147.4 & [@Roberts2014]\
Leninia stellans & Aptian & Deshayesites volgensis & A & 126.3 & 123 &
[@Fischer2014]\
Leptonectes moorei & Pliensbachian & & & 190.82 & 187.56 &
[@McGowan1999a]\
Leptonectes solei & Sinemurian & Arnioceras semicostatum--Asteroceras
obtusum & A & 197.8 & 193.81 & [@McGowan1993]\
Leptonectes tenuirostris & Hettangian--Pliensbachian &
*Pre-*Planorbis--Echioceras raricostatum--Amaltheus margaritatus & A &
201.3 & 184.2 & [@McGowan1989; @McGowan2003]\
Macgowania janiceps & Norian & Epigondollela matthewi--E. multidentata &
C & 220 & 216.9 & [@McGowan1996]\
Maiaspondylus lindoei & Albian & & & 111.27 & 110.22 & [@Maxwell2006a]\
Malawania anachronus & Hauterivian--Barremian & & & 131 & 125 &
[@Fischer2013a]\
Mikadocephalus gracilirostris & Anisian--Ladinian & & & 242.57 & 240.3 &
[@Maisch1997c]\
Mixosaurus cornalianus & Anisian--Ladinian & & & 242.57 & 240.3 &
[@Repossi1902; @McGowan2003]\
Mixosaurus kuhnschneyderi & Anisian--Ladinian & & & 242.57 & 240.3 &
[@Brinkmann1998]\
Mixosaurus xindianensis & Anisian & Nicoraella kockeli & C & 244.94 &
241.5 & [@Chen2010]\
Mollesaurus periallus & Bajocian & Emileia giebeli & A & 170.3 & 169.45
& [@Fernandez2014; @Fernandez1999]\
Muiscasaurus catheti & Barremian--Aptian & & & 129.4 & 113.0 &
[@Maxwell2016]\
Nannopterygius enthekiodon & Kimmeridgian & Aulacostephanus & A & 154.6
& 149.87 & [\[chapter1\]](#chapter1){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter1"}\
Ophthalmosaurus icenicus & Callovian--Oxfordian & Kosmoceras jasoni & A
& 165.59 & 161.39 & [\[chapter1\]](#chapter1){reference-type="ref"
reference="chapter1"}\
Ophthalmosaurus natans & Oxfordian & & & 163.5 & 157.3 & [@Gilmore1905]\
Ophthalmosaurus yasykovi & Tithonian & Dorsoplanites
panderi--Craspedites nodiger & A & 149.6 & 146.9 & [@Efimov1999]\
Palvennia hoybergeti & Tithonian & Dorsoplanites ilovaiskyi--D. maximus
& A & 148.3 & 147.4 & [@Druckenmiller2012a]\
Paraophthalmosaurus kabanovi & Tithonian & Epivirgatites nikitini & A &
147.9 & 146.9 & [@Efimov1999a]\
Paraophthalmosaurus saveljeviensis & Tithonian & & & 149.6 & 146.9 &
[@Arkhangelsky1997]\
Parvinatator wapitiensis & Olenekian & Subcolumbites & A & 247.9 &
247.71 & [@Nicholls1995]\
Pervushovisaurus bannovkensis & Cenomanian & & & 96.24 & 95.47 &
[@Fischer2014b]\
Pessopteryx nisseri & Olenekian & & & 247.7 & 247.1 & [@Wiman1910]\
Phalarodon callawayi & Anisian & & & 243.99 & 239.1 & [@Schmitz2004]\
Phalarodon fraasi & Anisian & & & 244.94 & 237 & [@Merriam1910]\
Phalarodon major & Anisian--Ladinian & & & 244.94 & 237 & [@Maisch2005]\
Phantomosaurus neubigi & Anisian & pulcher/robustus & A & 243.99 & 241.5
& [@Sander1997]\
Platypterygius americanus & Albian & & & 107.59 & 100.5 & [@Romer1968]\
Platypterygius australis & Albian & & & 113 & 100.5 &
[@Wade1984; @Wade1990]\
Platypterygius bedengensis & Hauterivian & Speetoniceras versicolor & A
& 133.88 & 132 & [@Efimov1997]\
Platypterygius hauthali & Barremian & Hatchiceras & A & 130.77 & 129.41
& [@Fernandez2005]\
Platypterygius hercynicus & Aptian & & & 125 & 113 & [@Kolb2009]\
Platypterygius ochevi & Albian--Cenomanian & & & 113 & 93.9 &
[@Arkhangelsky2008]\
Platypterygius platydactylus & Aptian & Hoplites deshayesi & A & 125.71
& 123.88 & [@Broili1908]\
Platypterygius sachicarum & Barremian--Aptian & & & 130.77 & 113 &
[@Paramo1997]\
Qianichthyosaurus xingyiensis & Ladinian & & & 237 & 228.35 &
[@Yang2013]\
Qianichthyosaurus zhoui & Carnian & & & 237 & 228.35 & [@Li1999]\
Quasianosteosaurus vikinghoegdai & Olenekian & & & 247.7 & 247.1 &
[@Maisch2003c]\
Shastasaurus alexandrae & Carnian & & & 233.5 & 228.35 & [@Merriam1902]\
Shastasaurus liangae & Carnian & & & 233.5 & 228.35 & [@Yin2000]\
Shastasaurus pacificus & Carnian & & & 233.5 & 228.35 & [@Merriam1908]\
Shastasaurus sikkaniensis & Norian & Mesohemavatites
columbianus/Epigondolella postera & A/C & 216.9 & 214.7 &
[@Nicholls2004]\
Shonisaurus popularis & Carnian & Klamathites macrolobatus & A & 233.5 &
228.35 & [@Camp1980]\
Simbirskiasaurus birjukovi & Barremian & Praeoxyteuthis pugio & A &
130.77 & 129.41 & [@Fischer2014b]\
Sisteronia seeleyi & Cenomanian & & & 100.5 & 96.24 & [@Fischer2014a]\
Stenopterygius aaleniensis & Aalenian & Pachylytoceras torulosum & A &
174.15 & 172.13 & [@Maxwell2012b]\
Stenopterygius quadriscissus & Toarcian & Dactylioceras
tenuicostatus--Harpoceras falsiferum & A & 182.7 & 180.81 &
[@Maisch2008b; @Maxwell2012]\
Stenopterygius triscissus & Toarcian & Dactylioceras
tenuicostatus--Harpoceras falsiferum & A & 182.7 & 180.81 &
[@Maisch2008b; @Maxwell2012]\
Stenopterygius uniter & Toarcian & Harpoceras falsiferum & A & 181.25 &
180.81 & [@Maisch2008b; @Maxwell2012]\
Suevoleviathan disinteger & Toarcian & Harpoceras falsiferum & A & 181.7
& 180.36 & [@Maisch1998]\
Suevoleviathan integer & Toarcian & & & 181.7 & 180.36 &
[@Huene1922b; @Maisch1998]\
Sveltonectes insolitus & Barremian & & & 129.6 & 126.3 &
[@Fischer2011c]\
Temnodontosaurus azerguensis & Toarcian & Harpoceras bifrons & A &
180.36 & 178.24 & [@Martin2012]\
Temnodontosaurus eurycephalus & Sinemurian & Arietites bucklandi & A &
199.3 & 197.8 & [@McGowan1974]\
Temnodontosaurus nuertingensis & Pliensbachian & Uptonia
jamesoni--Tragophyllocera ibex & A & 190.8 & 187.56 &
[@Huene1931; @Maisch1997b]\
Temnodontosaurus platyodon & Hettangian--Sinemurian & Schlotheimia
angulata--Arnioceras semicostatum & A & 200.1 & 196.31 & [@McGowan1974]\
Temnodontosaurus trigonodon & Toarcian & Dactylioceras
tenuicostatus--Harpoceras falsiferum & A & 182.7 & 180.36 &
[@Fraas1891; @Huene1922b]\
Thaisaurus chonglakmanii & Lower Triassic & & & 250.01 & 247.1 &
[@Mazin1991]\
Thalattoarchon saurophagis & Anisian & Nevadisculites taylori & A &
247.1 & 244.6 & [@Frobisch2013]\
Tholodus schmidi & Ladinian & & & 241 & 237 & [@DallaVecchia2004]\
Toretocnemus californicus & Carnian & & & 233.5 & 228.35 &
[@Merriam1903; @McGowan2003]\
Toretocnemus zitteli & Carnian & & & 233.5 & 228.35 &
[@Merriam1903; @McGowan2003]\
Undorosaurus gorodischensis & Tithonian & Epivirgatites nikitini & A &
147.9 & 146.9 & [@Efimov1999a]\
Undorosaurus trautscholdi & Tithonian & Epivirgatites
nikitini--Kachpurites fulgens & A & 147.9 & 146.6 & [@Arkhangelsky2014]\
Utatsusaurus hataii & Olenekian & Subcolumbites--Arnautoceratites & A &
247.9 & 247.71 & [@Shikama1978]\
Wimanius odontopalatus & Anisian--Ladinian & & & 241.5 & 237 &
[@Maisch1998a]\
Xinminosaurus catactes & Anisian & Nicoraella kockeli & C & 244.94 &
241.5 & [@Jiang2008a]\

l\>lS

\
Epoch & *Taxa included* & Number of taxa\

\
Epoch & *Taxa included* & Number of taxa\
Late Cretaceous & Pervushovisaurus bannovkensis & 3\
& **Platypterygius ochevi** &\
& Sisteronia seeleyi &\
Early Cretaceous & Acamptonectes densus & 17\
& Athabascasaurus bitumineus &\
& **Caypullisaurus bonapartei** &\
& Leninia stellans &\
& Maiaspondylus lindoei &\
& Malawania anachronus &\
& Muiscasaurus catheti &\
& Platypterygius americanus &\
& Platypterygius australis &\
& Platypterygius bedengensis &\
& Platypterygius hauthali &\
& Platypterygius hercynicus &\
& **Platypterygius ochevi** &\
& Platypterygius platydactylus &\
& Platypterygius sachicarum &\
& Simbirskiasaurus birjukovi &\
& Sveltonectes insolitus &\
Late Jurassic & Aegirosaurus leptospondylus & 16\
& Arthropterygius chrisorum &\
& Brachypterygius alekseevi &\
& Brachypterygius extremus &\
& Brachypterygius pseudoscythica &\
& **Caypullisaurus bonapartei** &\
& Cryopterygius kristiansenae &\
& Janusaurus lundi &\
& **Ophthalmosaurus icenicus** &\
& Nannopterygius enthekiodon &\
& Ophthalmosaurus natans &\
& Ophthalmosaurus saveljeviensis &\
& Ophthalmosaurus yasykovi &\
& Palvennia hoybergeti &\
& Undorosaurus gorodischensis &\
& Undorosaurus trautscholdi &\
Middle Jurassic & Chacaicosaurus cayi & 5\
& **Dearcmhara shawcrossi** &\
& Mollesaurus periallus &\
& **Ophthalmosaurus icenicus** &\
& Stenopterygius aaleniensis &\
Early Jurassic & **Dearcmhara shawcrossi** & 22\
& Eurhinosaurus longirostris &\
& Excalibosaurus costini &\
& Hauffiopteryx typicus &\
& Ichthyosaurus acutirostris &\
& Ichthyosaurus anningae &\
& Ichthyosaurus breviceps &\
& Ichthyosaurus communis &\
& Ichthyosaurus conybeari &\
& Leptonectes moorei &\
& Leptonectes solei &\
& Leptonectes tenuirostris &\
& Stenopterygius quadriscissus &\
& Stenopterygius triscissus &\
& Stenopterygius uniter &\
& Suevoleviathan disinteger &\
& Suevoleviathan integer &\
& Temnodontosaurus azerguensis &\
& Temnodontosaurus eurycephalus &\
& Temnodontosaurus nuertingensis &\
& Temnodontosaurus platyodon &\
& Temnodontosaurus trigonodon &\
Late Triassic & Californosaurus perrini & 15\
& Callawayia neoscapularis &\
& Guizhouichthyosaurus tangae &\
& Guizhouichthyosaurus wolonggangense &\
& Himalayasaurus tibetensis &\
& Hudsonelpidia brevirostris &\
& Macgowania janiceps &\
& Qianichthyosaurus xingyiensis &\
& Qianichthyosaurus zhoui &\
& Shastasaurus alexandrae &\
& Shastasaurus liangae &\
& Shastasaurus pacificus &\
& Shastasaurus sikkaniensis &\
& Toretocnemus californicus &\
& Toretocnemus zitteli &\
Middle Triassic & Barracudasauroides panxianensis & 19\
& Besanosaurus leptorhynchus &\
& Contectopalatus atavus &\
& Cymbospondylus buchseri &\
& Cymbospondylus nichollsi &\
& Cymbospondylus petrinus &\
& Cymbospondylus piscosus &\
& Mikadocephalus gracilirostris &\
& Mixosaurus cornalianus &\
& Mixosaurus kuhnschneyderi &\
& Mixosaurus xindianensis &\
& Phalarodon callawayi &\
& Phalarodon fraasi &\
& Phalarodon major &\
& Phantomosaurus neubigi &\
& Thalattoarchon saurophagis &\
& Tholodus schmidi &\
& Wimanius odontopalatus &\
& Xinminosaurus catactes &\
Early Triassic & Cartorhynchus lenticarpus & 12\
& Chaohusaurus chaoxianensis &\
& Chaohusaurus geishanensis &\
& Chaohusaurus zhangjiawanensis &\
& Grippia longirostris &\
& Gulosaurus helmi &\
& Isfjordosaurus minor &\
& Parvinatator wapitiensis &\
& Pessopteryx nisseri &\
& Quasianosteosaurus vikinghoegdai &\
& Thaisaurus chonglakmanii &\
& Utatsusaurus hataii &\

l\>lS

\
Clade & *Taxa included* & Number of taxa\

\
Clade & *Taxa included* & Number of taxa\
Outgroup & Hupehsuchus nanchangensis & 1\
Ichthyosauriformes & Cartorhynchus lenticarpus & 10\
& Chaohusaurus chaoxianensis &\
& Chaohusaurus geishanensis &\
& Chaohusaurus zhangjiawanensis &\
& Gulosaurus helmi &\
& Isfjordosaurus minor &\
& Parvinatator wapitiensis &\
& Thaisaurus chonglakmanii &\
& Utatsusaurus hataii &\
& Xinminosaurus catactes &\
Ichthyosauria & Cymbospondylus buchseri & 6\
& Cymbospondylus nichollsi &\
& Cymbospondylus petrinus &\
& Grippia longirostris &\
& Pessopteryx nisseri &\
& Phantomosaurus neubigi &\
Euichthyosauria & Besanosaurus leptorhynchus & 18\
& Californosaurus perrini &\
& Callawayia neoscapularis &\
& Cymbospondylus piscosus &\
& Guizhouichthyosaurus tangae &\
& Guizhouichthyosaurus wolonggangense &\
& Hudsonelpidia brevirostris &\
& Macgowania janiceps &\
& Mikadocephalus gracilirostris &\
& Qianichthyosaurus xingyiensis &\
& Qianichthyosaurus zhoui &\
& Quasianosteosaurus vikinghoegdai &\
& Shastasaurus sikkaniensis &\
& Suevoleviathan disinteger &\
& Suevoleviathan integer &\
& Toretocnemus californicus &\
& Toretocnemus zitteli &\
& Wimanius odontopalatus &\
Mixosauridae & Barracudasauroides panxianensis & 11\
& Contectopalatus atavus &\
& Himalayasaurus tibetensis &\
& Mixosaurus cornalianus &\
& Mixosaurus kuhnschneyderi &\
& Mixosaurus xindianensis &\
& Phalarodon callawayi &\
& Phalarodon fraasi &\
& Phalarodon major &\
& Thalattoarchon saurophagis &\
& Tholodus schmidi &\
Shastasauria & Shastasaurus alexandrae & 4\
& Shastasaurus liangae &\
& Shastasaurus pacificus &\
& Shonisaurus popularis &\
Neoichthyosauria & Chacaicosaurus cayi & 22\
& Eurhinosaurus longirostris &\
& Excalibosaurus costini &\
& Hauffiopteryx typicus &\
& Ichthyosaurus acutirostris &\
& Ichthyosaurus anningae &\
& Ichthyosaurus breviceps &\
& Ichthyosaurus communis &\
& Ichthyosaurus conybeari &\
& Leptonectes moorei &\
& Leptonectes solei &\
& Leptonectes tenuirostris &\
& Malawania anachronus &\
& Stenopterygius aaleniensis &\
& Stenopterygius quadriscissus &\
& Stenopterygius triscissus &\
& Stenopterygius uniter &\
& Temnodontosaurus azerguensis &\
& Temnodontosaurus eurycephalus &\
& Temnodontosaurus nuertingensis &\
& Temnodontosaurus platyodon &\
& Temnodontosaurus trigonodon &\
Ophthalmosauridae & Acamptonectes densus & 34\
& Aegirosaurus leptospondylus &\
& Arthropterygius chrisorum &\
& Athabascasaurus bitumineus &\
& Brachypterygius alekseevi &\
& Brachypterygius extremus &\
& Brachypterygius pseudoscythica &\
& Caypullisaurus bonapartei &\
& Cryopterygius kristiansenae &\
& Janusaurus lundi &\
& Leninia stellans &\
& Maiaspondylus lindoei &\
& Mollesaurus periallus &\
& Muiscasaurus catheti &\
& Nannopterygius enthekiodon &\
& Ophthalmosaurus icenicus &\
& Ophthalmosaurus natans &\
& Paraophthalmosaurus saveljeviensis &\
& Paraophthalmosaurus kabanovi &\
& Ophthalmosaurus yasykovi &\
& Palvennia hoybergeti &\
& Pervushovisaurus bannovkensis &\
& Platypterygius americanus &\
& Platypterygius australis &\
& Platypterygius hauthali &\
& Platypterygius hercynicus &\
& Platypterygius ochevi &\
& Platypterygius platydactylus &\
& Platypterygius sachicarum &\
& Simbirskiasaurus birjukovi &\
& Sisteronia seeleyi &\
& Sveltonectes insolitus &\
& Undorosaurus gorodischensis &\
& Undorosaurus trautscholdi &\

cS\[round-mode=figures,round-precision=4\]S\[round-mode=figures,round-precision=4\]S\[round-mode=figures,round-precision=4\]

\
Eigenvector & Eigenvalue & Variance (%) & Cumulative Variance (%)\

\
Eigenvector & Eigenvalue & Variance (%) & Cumulative Variance (%)\
& 1346.4055 & 38.53 & 10.4537\
2 & 1021.5532 & 29.2338 & 18.3852\
3 & 580.5995 & 16.615 & 22.893\
4 & 480.5385 & 13.7516 & 26.624\
5 & 389.6287 & 11.15 & 29.6491\
6 & 339.8644 & 9.7259 & 32.2879\
7 & 303.4039 & 8.6825 & 34.6435\
8 & 271.8042 & 7.7782 & 36.7539\
9 & 232.3991 & 6.6506 & 38.5582\
10 & 219.77 & 6.2892 & 40.2646\
11 & 209.1178 & 5.9843 & 41.8882\
12 & 187.1566 & 5.3559 & 43.3413\
13 & 176.1313 & 5.0403 & 44.7088\
14 & 164.0022 & 4.6932 & 45.9821\
15 & 160.31 & 4.5876 & 47.2268\
16 & 141.0404 & 4.0361 & 48.3219\
17 & 129.4995 & 3.7059 & 49.3273\
18 & 121.2151 & 3.4688 & 50.2684\
19 & 115.2172 & 3.2972 & 51.163\
20 & 110.95 & 3.1751 & 52.0244\
21 & 101.3368 & 2.9 & 52.8112\
22 & 89.9303 & 2.5735 & 53.5094\
23 & 84.5879 & 2.4206 & 54.1662\
24 & 80.0327 & 2.2903 & 54.7876\
25 & 76.205 & 2.1808 & 55.3793\
26 & 74.6899 & 2.1374 & 55.9592\
27 & 68.1306 & 1.9497 & 56.4881\
28 & 62.8033 & 1.7972 & 56.9757\
29 & 61.4648 & 1.7589 & 57.453\
30 & 57.7143 & 1.6516 & 57.9011\
31 & 55.5486 & 1.5896 & 58.3324\
32 & 48.0578 & 1.3753 & 58.7055\
33 & 45.759 & 1.3095 & 59.0608\
34 & 45.1573 & 1.2923 & 59.4114\
35 & 43.573 & 1.2469 & 59.7497\
36 & 38.6845 & 1.107 & 60.05\
37 & 37.1952 & 1.0644 & 60.3388\
38 & 35.374 & 1.0123 & 60.6135\
39 & 34.4763 & 0.9866 & 60.8811\
40 & 32.7202 & 0.9364 & 61.1352\
41 & 30.9305 & 0.8851 & 61.3753\
42 & 29.7332 & 0.8509 & 61.6062\
43 & 27.3328 & 0.7822 & 61.8184\
44 & 24.794 & 0.7095 & 62.0109\
45 & 22.2708 & 0.6373 & 62.1838\
46 & 21.0864 & 0.6034 & 62.3475\
47 & 20.0419 & 0.5735 & 62.5031\
48 & 18.7457 & 0.5364 & 62.6487\
49 & 15.5875 & 0.4461 & 62.7697\
50 & 13.5949 & 0.389 & 62.8753\
51 & 13.0719 & 0.3741 & 62.9768\
52 & 12.3252 & 0.3527 & 63.0725\
53 & 10.94 & 0.3131 & 63.1574\
54 & 10.2153 & 0.2923 & 63.2367\
55 & 8.1071 & 0.232 & 63.2996\
56 & 7.5383 & 0.2157 & 63.3582\
57 & 7.2507 & 0.2075 & 63.4145\
58 & 5.6999 & 0.1631 & 63.4587\
59 & 4.8005 & 0.1374 & 63.496\
60 & 3.3456 & 0.0957 & 63.522\
61 & 2.5645 & 0.0734 & 63.5419\
62 & 2.3292 & 0.0667 & 63.56\
63 & 0.7269 & 0.0208 & 63.5656\
64 & 0 & 0 & 63.5656\
65 & -0.8033 & -0.023 & 63.5719\
66 & -1.6138 & -0.0462 & 63.5844\
67 & -2.9206 & -0.0836 & 63.6071\
68 & -3.4772 & -0.0995 & 63.6341\
69 & -5.2655 & -0.1507 & 63.6749\
70 & -5.6347 & -0.1612 & 63.7187\
71 & -7.6883 & -0.22 & 63.7784\
72 & -8.058 & -0.2306 & 63.8409\
73 & -9.2273 & -0.2641 & 63.9126\
74 & -10.6377 & -0.3044 & 63.9952\
75 & -12.1938 & -0.3489 & 64.0898\
76 & -14.489 & -0.4146 & 64.2023\
77 & -15.9708 & -0.457 & 64.3263\
78 & -18.5218 & -0.53 & 64.4701\
79 & -19.4977 & -0.558 & 64.6215\
80 & -22.1336 & -0.6334 & 64.7934\
81 & -26.7525 & -0.7656 & 65.0011\
82 & -28.8076 & -0.8244 & 65.2248\
83 & -32.2962 & -0.9242 & 65.4755\
84 & -34.3458 & -0.9829 & 65.7422\
85 & -36.9483 & -1.0573 & 66.029\
86 & -42.9253 & -1.2284 & 66.3623\
87 & -50.7039 & -1.451 & 66.756\
88 & -54.906 & -1.5712 & 67.1823\
89 & -66.3631 & -1.8991 & 67.6975\
90 & -69.6408 & -1.9929 & 68.2382\
91 & -74.9078 & -2.1436 & 68.8198\
92 & -87.9995 & -2.5183 & 69.5031\
93 & -89.9438 & -2.5739 & 70.2014\
94 & -101.7003 & -2.9104 & 70.991\
95 & -111.8164 & -3.1998 & 71.8592\
96 & -121.38 & -3.4735 & 72.8016\
97 & -136.1074 & -3.895 & 73.8584\
98 & -159.9798 & -4.5781 & 75.1005\
99 & -173.9523 & -4.978 & 76.4511\
100 & -182.6548 & -5.227 & 77.8692\
101 & -196.7035 & -5.6291 & 79.3964\
102 & -255.2997 & -7.3059 & 81.3786\
103 & -286.541 & -8.1999 & 83.6034\
104 & -362.5949 & -10.3764 & 86.4186\
105 & -432.4597 & -12.3757 & 89.7763\
106 & -460.104 & -13.1668 & 93.3486\
107 & -856.6841 & -24.5157 & 100\

\>lSSSS\[round-mode=places,round-precision=4\]XX

\
*Taxon* & Body length (m) & Skull length (mm) & Orbit length (mm) &
Orbital ratio & Source & Measurement method\

\
*Taxon* & Body length (m) & Skull length (mm) & Orbit length (mm) &
Orbital ratio & Source & Measurement method\
Aegirosaurus leptospondylus & 1.77 & 560 & 104 & 0.185714286 &
[@Bardet2000]: SM & In-text values; tbls 1, 2\
Athabascasaurus bitumineus & 3.5 & & 225 & & [@Druckenmiller2010]: TMP
2000.29.01 & In-text values; measurements on fig. 5\
Barracudasauroides panxianensis & & 212 & 40 & 0.188679245 &
[@Jiang2006]: GMPKU-P-1033 & Table 1\
Besanosaurus leptorhynchus & 5.412 & 510 & 75 & 0.147058824 &
[@DalSasso1996]: BES SC 999 & Table on page 9\
Brachypterygius extremus & & & 148 & &
[\[chapter1\]](#chapter1){reference-type="ref" reference="chapter1"}:
BRSMG Ce 16696 & Measured in person with callipers\
Callawayia neoscapularis & & 453 & 90 & 0.198675497 & [@McGowan1994a]:
ROM 41993 & In-text values\
Cartorhynchus lenticarpus & 0.4 & 55 & 20 & 0.363636364 &
[@Motani2014a]: AGB 6257 & In-text values\
Caypullisaurus bonapartei & & 1300 & 255 & 0.196153846 &
[@Fernandez1997]: MACN-N-32 & In-text values; measurements on fig. 2\
Chacaicosaurus cayi & & 980 & 130 & 0.132653061 & [@Fernandez1994]: MOZ
5803 PV & Table 1\
Chaohusaurus chaoxianensis & 1 & 117 & 30 & 0.256410256 & [@Motani2014]:
AGM CHS-5 & Measurements on fig. 3a\
Contectopalatus atavus & & 135 & 34 & 0.251851852 & [@Liu2013]: LPV
30872 & Table 1\
Cryopterygius kristiansenae & 5.5 & 1220 & 270 & 0.221311475 &
[@Druckenmiller2012]: PMO 214.578 & In-text values; tbl. 1\
Cymbospondylus buchseri & 5.5 & & 158 & & [@Sander1989]: PIMUZ T4351 &
In-text values; tbl. 1\
Cymbospondylus nichollsi & & & 200 & & [@Frobisch2006]: FMNH PR2251 &
Table 1\
Cymbospondylus petrinus & 9.5 & 1166 & 198 & 0.169811321 &
[@Merriam1908; @Frobisch2006]: UCMP 9950 & Table 2\
Eurhinosaurus longirostris & 5.07 & 1250 & 180 & 0.144 & [@Huene1951]:
Tübingen; II6 & Table\
Excalibosaurus costini & & 1540 & & & [@McGowan2003a]: ROM 47697 &
In-text values\
Grippia longirostris & & & 43 & & [@Motani2000]: PMU 445 & Measurements
on Text-fig. 2a\
Guizhouichthyosaurus tangae & 6 & 800 & 175 & 0.21875 & [@Pan2006]:
GNP-D41 & In-text values; measurements on figs 1, 7\
Guizhouichthyosaurus wolonggangense & & 645 & 122 & 0.189147287 &
[@Chen2007]: SPCV10306 & In-text values\
Gulosaurus helmi & & 87 & & & [@Brinkman1992; @Cuthbertson2013a]: TMP
89.127.3 & In-text values\
Hauffiopteryx typicus & 1.7 & 380 & 116 & 0.305263158 & [@Maisch2008]:
GPIT 1491/1 & Measurements on pl. 8, fig. 3\
Hudsonelpidia brevirostris & & 131 & 47 & 0.358778626 & [@McGowan1995]:
ROM 44629 & In-text values\
Hupehsuchus nanchangensis & 0.74 & 126 & & & [@Carroll1991]: IVPP V3232
& In-text values\
Ichthyosaurus anningae & & & 72.5 & & [@Lomax2015]: DONMG 183.98 & Table
1\
Ichthyosaurus breviceps & 1.5 & 240 & 77.5 & 0.322916667 &
[@McGowan1974a]: NHMUK PV 43006 & Measurements on fig. 7\
Ichthyosaurus communis & 1.5 & 256 & 67.5 & 0.263671875 &
[@McGowan1974a]: NHMUK PV R1162 & Measurements on fig. 2\
Janusaurus lundi & 4 & & 220 & & [@Roberts2014]: PMO 222.654 & In-text
values; tbl. 1\
Leninia stellans & & & 265 & & [@Fischer2014]: YKM 65931 & Figure 8\
Leptonectes moorei & & 328 & 107.2 & 0.326829268 & [@McGowan1999]: NHMUK
PV 14370 & Table 1\
Leptonectes solei & 8 & 1585 & 240 & 0.151419558 & [@McGowan1993]: BRSMG
Ce 9856 & Table 2\
Leptonectes tenuirostris & 2.5 & 523 & 114 & 0.217973231 &
[@McGowan1989]: OUM J10305 & Table 4\
Macgowania janiceps & & & 150 & & [@McGowan1996]: ROM 41992 & In-text
values\
Mixosaurus cornalianus & 0.9 & 195 & 45 & 0.230769231 & [@Repossi1902] &
Measurements on pl. 9\
Mixosaurus kuhnschneyderi & 0.7 & 160 & & & [@Brinkmann1998]: PIMUZ
T1324 & In-text values\
Mixosaurus xindianensis & 1 & 223 & 44.5 & 0.19955157 & [@Chen2010]:
YIGMR SPCV0732 & In-text values\
Mollesaurus periallus & & & 376 & & [@Fernandez2014]: MOZ 2282V &
Measurements on fig. 1\
Muiscasaurus catheti & & & 109 & & [@Maxwell2016]: CIP-FCG-CBP-74 &
In-text values\
Nannopterygius enthekiodon & & & 130 & &
[\[chapter1\]](#chapter1){reference-type="ref" reference="chapter1"}:
NHMUK PV 46497 & Measurements on fig. 34\
Ophthalmosaurus icenicus & 4.12 & 965 & 255 & 0.264248705 &
[\[chapter1\]](#chapter1){reference-type="ref" reference="chapter1"}:
NHMUK PV R3893 & Measured in person with callipers\
Ophthalmosaurus natans & & 1082 & 234 & 0.216266174 & [@Gilmore1905]:
CMNH 878 & In-text values\
Ophthalmosaurus yasykovi & & & 120 & & [@Efimov1999]: UPM EP-II-7(1235)
& In-text values\
Palvennia hoybergeti & & 860 & 290 & 0.337209302 & [@Druckenmiller2012]:
SVB 1451 & In-text values; tbl. 7\
Parvinatator wapitiensis & & & 25 & & [@Nicholls1995]: TMP 89.127.8 &
Measurements on fig. 1\
Phalarodon callawayi & 1.5 & 300 & 65.5 & 0.218333333 & [@Schmitz2004]:
CMC VP 7275 & In-text values\
Phantomosaurus neubigi & & 550 & & & [@Sander1997]: BSP 1992 I 39 &
Table 1\
Platypterygius americanus & & 1250 & 150 & 0.12 & [@Romer1968]: UW 2421
& In-text values\
Platypterygius australis & 5.6 & 1430 & 230 & 0.160839161 & [@Wade1984]:
QM F2453 & In-text values; measurements on fig. 1\
Platypterygius hercynicus & 4.65 & 1040 & & & [@Kolb2009]: SGS & In-text
values\
Platypterygius ochevi & 3.6 & & & & [@Arkhangelsky2008]: ZIN PH 1/71 &
In-text values\
Platypterygius platydactylus & 5 & 1170 & & & [@Broili1908] & In-text
values\
Platypterygius sachicarum & & 870 & 143 & 0.164367816 & [@Paramo1997]:
DON 19671 & Table\
Qianichthyosaurus xingyiensis & 1.3 & 250 & 62 & 0.248 & [@Yang2013]:
WS2011-46-R1 & In-text values\
Qianichthyosaurus zhoui & 1.21 & 240 & 83 & 0.345833333 & [@Li1999]:
LVPPV 11839 & Measurements on fig. 1\
Shastasaurus alexandrae & & & 130 & & [@Merriam1902] & Measurements on
pl. 12\
Shastasaurus liangae & 6.44 & 750 & & & [@Yin2000]: GMR014 & In-text
values\
Shastasaurus sikkaniensis & 21 & 3000 & & & [@Nicholls2004]: TMP
94.378.2 & In-text values\
Shonisaurus popularis & 13.7 & 2750 & 300 & 0.109090909 & [@Camp1980]:
Specimen A' & In-text values; tbl. 1\
Stenopterygius aaleniensis & & & 118 & & [@Maxwell2012]: SMNS 90699 &
Table 1\
Stenopterygius quadriscissus & 2.69 & 625 & 114 & 0.1824 &
[@Maisch2008]: GPIT 43/0219-1 & Measurements on pl. 1, fig. 1\
Stenopterygius triscissus & 2.39 & 634 & 107 & 0.168769716 &
[@Maisch2008]: BMK 813B & Measurements on pl. 3, fig. 4\
Stenopterygius uniter & 1.93 & 537 & 107 & 0.199255121 & [@Maisch2008]:
GPIT 1491/10 & Measurements on pl. 6, fig. 3\
Suevoleviathan disinteger & 4.31 & 860 & 170 & 0.197674419 &
[@Maisch1998]: SMNS 15390 & In-text values\
Suevoleviathan integer & 3.05 & & & & [@Huene1922b]: SMNS 4692 & In-text
values\
Sveltonectes insolitus & & 580 & 130 & 0.18 & [@Fischer2011c]: IRSNB
R269 & Table1; measurements on fig. 1\
Temnodontosaurus eurycephalus & & 1020 & 200 & 0.196078431 &
[@McGowan1974]: NHMUK PV R1157 & In-text values\
Temnodontosaurus nuertingensis & & 1.28 & & & [@Maisch1997b]: SMNS 13488
& In-text measurements\
Temnodontosaurus platyodon & 6.38 & 1790 & 237 & 0.132402235 &
[@McGowan1974]: NHMUK PV 2003 & In-text values\
Temnodontosaurus trigonodon & 5.17 & 1090 & 150 & 0.137614679 &
[@Fraas1891]: SMNS 5093 & In-text values\
Thalattoarchon saurophagis & 8.6 & 1200 & 308 & 0.256666667 &
[@Frobisch2013]: FMNH PR 3032 & In-text values; measurements on fig. 1\
Utatsusaurus hataii & 3 & 215 & & & [@Shikama1978]: IGPS 95941 & In-text
values\
Xinminosaurus catactes & 2.32 & 290 & & & [@Jiang2008]: GMPKU-P-1071 &
In-text values\

R code
------

``` {#lst:scriptstbtr .r name="rstbscript" caption="Code for running the analysis of rates of evolution across several ichthyosaur phylogenies." label="lst:scriptstbtr" numbers="none" style="code" language="R" basicstyle="\\footnotesize\\ttfamily"}
£\textrm{\textbf{Set working directory}}£
setwd('~/stabletraits')

£\textrm{\textbf{Load useful packages}}£
library(ape)
library(phytools)
library(paleotree)
library(strap)
library(geiger)

£\textrm{\textbf{Read in trees}}£
trees <- read.tree('trees.tre')

£\textrm{\textbf{Read in occurrence data}}£
£\textrm{Column names [\texttt{col.names}] are added to be passed into geoscalePhylo in strap}£
times <- read.csv('times.csv', row.names=1,  col.names=c('Taxon',  'FAD',  'LAD'))

£\textrm{\textbf{Sample 1000 trees}}£
sample.trees <- sample(trees, 1000, replace=FALSE)
write.tree(sample.trees, file='sample.trees.tre')

£\textrm{\textbf{Timescale trees}}£
multi.timePaleoPhy <- function(tree, time) timePaleoPhy(tree, time, type='equal', vartime=2, randres=FALSE, add.term=FALSE, inc.term.adj=FALSE, plot=FALSE)
timeTrees <- lapply(sample.trees, multi.timePaleoPhy, time=times)

£\textrm{\textbf{Calculate stratigraphic congruence fro trees}}£
strat.fit <- StratPhyloCongruence(sample.trees, times, rlen=252.17-max(times), method='equal', samp.perm=1, rand.perm=100, hard=TRUE, randomly.sample.ages=FALSE, fix.topology=TRUE, fix.outgroup=TRUE)

£\textrm{\textbf{Get data for tips to keep}}£
orbit <- read.table(file='orbit.txt', row.names=1)
£\textrm{Remove tips without data and export pruned trees}£
trim.trees <- list()
for (i in 1:length(trees)) {
	fltree <- paste0('./tree', i, '.tre')
	fldata <- paste0('./orbit', i, '.txt')
	tmp <- treedata(trees[[i]], orbit)
	trim.trees[[i]] <- tmp$phy
	write.tree(tmp$phy, file=fltree)
	write.table(tmp$data, file=fldata, row.names=FALSE, col.names=FALSE, quote=FALSE, sep='\t')
}
class(trim.trees) <- 'multiPhylo'
£\textrm{\textit{This can be applied equally with the other datasets.}}£

£\textrm{\textbf{Run \texttt{stabletraits} and \texttt{stabletraitssum} from R}}£
stcommand <- 'stabletraits'
sumcommand <- 'stabletraitssum'
for (i in 1:length(trim.trees)) {
	arg.tree <- paste0('--tree tree', i, '.tre')
	arg.data <- paste0('--data orbit/size', i, '.txt')
	arg.output <- paste0('--output orbit/out', i)
	stArgs <- c(arg.tree, arg.data, arg.output)
	sum.path <- paste0('--path orbit/out', i)
	sumArgs <- c(sum.path)
	system2(stcommand, args=stArgs, stdout='', wait=TRUE)
	system2(sumcommand, args=sumArgs, stdout='', wait=TRUE)
}

£\textrm{\textbf{Multiple node height tests (modified from \texttt{geiger} package)}}£
bt.list <- list()
pics.list <- list()

for (i in 1:length(timeTrees)) {
	tmp <- treedata(timeTrees[[i]], orbit)
	tmp.phy <- tmp$phy
	tmp.data <- tmp$data
	bt.list[[i]] <- branching.times(timeTrees[[i]])
	pics.list[[i]] <- abs(pic(tmp.data, tmp.phy))
}
df.bt <- do.call('cbind',bt.list)
df.pics <- do.call('cbind',pics.list)
df.bt <- abs(df.bt - max(df.bt))

£\textrm{\emph{Setup plot area}}£
dev.new(width=8, height=5)
par(mar=c(4,4,1,1))
plot(df.bt, df.pics, type='n', xlab='Branching age (Ma)', ylab='Absolute value of contrasts', xlim=rev(range(df.bt)))

£\textrm{\emph{Plot points in light grey and \textallsc{LOESS} curves in darker grey}}£
points(df.bt, df.pics, col='grey90', pch=4, cex=0.4)
for (i in 1:length(timeTrees)) {
	lines(loess.smooth(df.bt[,i], df.pics[,i], span=2/3, degree=1, family=c('gaussian'), evaluation=100), col='grey70')
}

£\textrm{\emph{Plot \textallsc{LOESS} curves for highest stratigraphically consistent trees in red}}£
lines(loess.smooth(df.bt[,33], df.pics[,33], span=2/3, degree=1, family=c('gaussian'), evaluation=100),col='red')
lines(loess.smooth(df.bt[,603], df.pics[,603], span=2/3, degree=1, family=c('gaussian'), evaluation=100),col='red')
```
